# Carrickmacross

Carrickmacross (Irish: Carraig Mhachaire Rois, meaning 'rock of the
wooded plain') is a town in County Monaghan, Ireland. The town and
environs had a population of 5,032 according to the 2016 census, making
it the second-largest town in the county. Carrickmacross is a market
town which developed around a castle built by the Earl of Essex in 1630.
The town is 20 km west of Dundalk and 75 km north-north-west of Dublin
city centre and 106 km south west of Belfast. Carrickmacross won the
European Entente Florale Silver Medal Award in 1998. The local Gaelic
football and hurling club is Carrickmacross Emmets. The local soccer
team is Carrick Rovers.

## History

### Foundation and development

Carrickmacross is a market town which developed around a castle built by
the Earl of Essex in 1630. The Convent of St Louis now stands on the
original castle site, as the castle itself was destroyed in the late
17th century during the Williamite Wars.

The town developed further as a market town during the 18th century, and
a number of large municipal and religious buildings were built to serve
the growing population during the 19th century. The town experienced
population decline in mid- to late-19th century, during the Great
Famine, with the population decreasing from 2,063 in 1861 to 1,779
inhabitants by 1891. The town's Poor Law Union Workhouse and Fever
Hospital were built in this period - the latter later becoming the
offices of the Urban District Council which was originally formed in
1899.

### Built heritage

Among the historic buildings in the town is the Roman Catholic church
which was completed in 1866 and is dedicated to Saint Joseph. It
contains ten stained-glass windows which were designed by the artist
Harry Clarke in 1925. The town's Church of Ireland church, dedicated to
Saint Finbarr, is older, and was built c.1770 before being remodelled
c.1845.

Magheross Church, located on the outskirts of the town, is also of
historical interest, and originally dates from c.1550. Other notable
buildings include the Carrickmacross Courthouse (built in 1837) and the
restored Poor Law Union Workhouse (built in 1841).

The grave of Patrick Byrne (1794–1863), the last major exponent of the
Gaelic harp and the first Irish traditional musician ever photographed,
is in the area.

### Lacemaking

The town is known for the lace bearing its name. Carrickmacross lace is
worked in an individual style, devised by Mrs Grey Porter, wife of the
rector of Donaghmoyne, who introduced it in 1820. When she left the
district the teaching of Carrickmacross lacemaking was continued by Miss
Reid of Rahans, but it was only after the Great Famine in 1846, when a
lace school was set up by the managers of the Bath and Shirley estates
at Carrickmacross as a means of helping their starving tenants, that the
lace became known and found sales.

Subsequently, the lacemaking declined, but in the last decade of the
19th century the Sisters of St Louis founded their own lace school to
revive the craft, and this was quite profitable for several years.
Although the outbreak of the 1914–18 war marked the virtual end of
commercial production of hand-made lace in Europe, the lace school kept
the technique alive throughout most of the 20th century. In 1984 the St
Louis Sisters assisted in the formation of the Carrickmacross Lace Co-
operative, which maintains the tradition to this day.

### Luftwaffe attack

Although Ireland was neutral during World War Two, there were some
incidents during the period. On 20 December 1940, as well as two bombs
falling on Sandycove in Dublin, two more fell on Shantonagh near
Carrickmacross, causing minor damage to house property.

## Transport

Carrickmacross railway station opened on 31 July 1886, the terminus of a
branch from the Dundalk–Enniskillen line at Inniskeen. The station, and
the branch, closed to passengers on 10 March 1947, but remained open for
goods traffic until final closure on 1 January 1960.

## Education

### Primary schools

There are three primary schools in Carrickmacross:

St. Joseph's Boys National School, situated near St. Macartan's Villas,
is an all-boys national school which was previously run by the Patrician
Brothers.

Bunscoil Lughaidh Naofa, which is in Cloughvalley, is an all-girls
school, was run by the St. Louis nuns who came to Carrickmacross in
1888.

Scoil Rois is a Gaelscoil (an Irish language-medium school) in
Carrickmacross. It is a mixed school that, having moved from the Convent
Avenue, now occupies newer premises built across from Bunscoil Lughaidh
Naofa.

### Secondary schools

The Patrician High School (or PHS) is one of three secondary schools in
Carrickmacross. It was set up by the Patrician Brothers, and was
previously situated next to the Church on O'Neills street; that building
is now the Scout Hall. It moved to Rockdaniel Road in 1970, and a new
extension was opened in 2007. As of 2015 it had approximately 500 pupils
enrolled.

Inver College, called the TEC by students and townspeople due to its
being a technological school, is a mixed school situated on the
Castleblayney Road. As of 2019, it had approximately 320 students
enrolled. Inver College won the U16 VEC GAA County Championship for the
second consecutive year in January 2011.

St. Louis Convent is an all-girls secondary school set up by the St.
Louis nuns in the 19th century. There were approximately 570 pupils
enrolled in the school as of 2017. The school was set up in honour of
St. Louis (Louis IX of France). The motto of the school is Ut Sint Unum,
Latin for 'that they may be one'. The school is situated on the Convent
Avenue.

## Town twinning

Carrickmacross is twinned with the commune of Carhaix, Brittany, in
France.

## Governance and politics

Carrickmacross town council elects 9 members and is responsible for the
provision of local services. At the last local elections in 2009 three
members were elected from Fine Gael and two each from Sinn Féin, Fianna
Fáil and the Green Party. It forms part of the five-seat Carrickmacross
Local Electoral Area for elections for Monaghan County Council.

In February 2010, the town council voted 5:4 to remove a page signed by
the Israeli ambassador from the town's visitors' book in response to the
illegal use of Irish passports by agents of Mossad in the assassination
of Mahmoud al-Mabhouh.

## People

Barry Conlon, footballer

Noel Curran, RTÉ Director General, who was born in the town.

Francis Noel Duffy, Green Party politician

Thomas Hughes, Victoria Cross winner

Eileen Kennedy, Ireland's first female judge

Thomas McMahon, convicted murderer of four including Admiral of the
Fleet The 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma, two children and an elderly
woman

Gerry Murphy, RTÉ weatherman

Ardal O'Hanlon, comedian and actor

Rory O'Hanlon, former Ceann Comhairle

Henry O'Reilly, Irish-American businessman and telegraphy pioneer

Sephira, classical crossover group

The Flaws, indie rock band

## See also

List of towns and villages in Ireland

## References

## External links