# Magheracloone

Magheracloone is a parish in south County Monaghan. Its name comes from
the Irish Machaire Cluana which means 'plain of meadow'. A generally
hilly parish; its name is derived from its most important place in
ancient times; a flat area of land in the townland of Camaghy, on which
the sports ground and ancient church of St. Molua were located. The
parish covers 12,952 statute acres in area, making it the largest parish
in South Monaghan. The parish borders three neighbouring counties;
Cavan, Louth and Meath. Magheracloone is the only parish in Monaghan to
border Meath; it is located approximately 90 km from both Belfast and
Dublin.

During the 1840s, the population was approximately 9,000. During the
19th Century, the population declined sharply, largely due to The Great
Famine. The current population is approximately 2,500.

Magheracloone contains the only gypsum mine in Ireland. Extraction from
underneath the land has caused sinkholes on occasion, most notably in
1973 and in 2018.

## History

Magheracloone is at the South of Ulster. Its position just beyond the
Pale and on the edge of two Gaelic kingdoms meant that it has always
been a borderland.

After the conquest of Ireland and the plantation of Ulster Essex was
granted the lands of South Monaghan. Since the 17th century the absentee
'Shirley Family' landlords ruled the majority of land in Magheracloone.
Their holdings have since been reduced to include a 4000-acre walled
estate, just outside Carrickmacross, where the family seat, Lough Fea
house, is located. They also technically own the west side of
Carrickmacross Main Street, and continue to collect ground rents from
most businesses located there, much to the ire of locals (the case for
ground rent has been upheld in the Irish courts).

## The Battle of Magheracloone

The 'Battle of Magheracloone' occurred in 1843 at Ss. Peter & Paul's
Roman Catholic church.

The text now follows of a plaque recently erected there in memoriam:

" In 1843 the tenants on the Shirley estate, of which Magheracloone was
a part, refused to pay their rent until their complaints had been
addressed by the landlord. Attempts by the bailiffs to seize cattle or
goods from the tenants who would not pay were stopped by the activities
of 'The Molly Maguires'. The centre of British rule in Ireland, Dublin
Castle, agreed to provide troops to protect the agents who were serving
notices of eviction to tenants. On 5 June 1843, a bailiff from the
Shirley Estate along with a company of troops marched toward the church
of Saints Peter and Paul (this very church) in Magheracloone. The
intention was to post a notice of eviction to several tenants in the
area, on the door of the church. They were

met by a large, howling and hooting crowd who blocked their path. The
troops fixed

their bayonets and moved forward, only to be met with a shower of
stones.

Several of the troops were hit with stones and at the same instant the
entire company

discharged one round each from their guns into the crowd. The crowd
backed off.

The Company Commander, fearful of a greater slaughter, called his troops
back to

their carriages and they beat a speedy retreat, followed all the way by
angry

remnants of the crowd. However, back on the road in front of the

church a young servant boy lay dead. Peter Agnew from Lisnaguiveragh,

Carrickmacross was at service with Owen Smith of Corrybracken

Two days later the coroner's jury (composed of six Protestants and
thirteen Roman

Catholics) held that as it was not known whose shot had killed the boy,
no

responsibility could be assessed. But the jury pointedly commented that
'it has not been

sufficiently proved to us that at the time of the firing the party of
Constabulary were in

imminent risk of their lives'. (Outrage Papers). While this incident may
be described as a

mere skirmish with one fatality, reporting of the event in the local,
national and

international newspapers prompted questions to be raised in the House of
Commons ".

## Faith

The people of Magheracloone worship in three churches; two Roman
Catholic (Ss. Peter & Paul, and St. Patrick's) and one Church of Ireland
(St. Molua's). St. Molua's is located on the site of the original Roman
Catholic church, from which Catholics were barred during the penal laws.
At that time, Catholics attended school and worshipped outside at 'hedge
schools' and 'mass rocks', as they were barred from having suitable
buildings for these purposes, speaking Irish was banned, and the people
were required (in public office and many professions) to take an oath
citing the supremacy of the monarch over the Roman Pontiff - an oath
which Catholics obviously could not take. A mass rock exists on private
property along the River Glyde in Tonaneave; a long stone crosses the
river to form a bridge; the priest would stand on one side, and the
congregation on the other; the river served both to separate the people
from the sacrament (the function performed by a reredos in a church) and
to drown out their prayers, for fear of being heard by British soldiers.
It is said that, during the Penal Laws, local Protestants kept watch on
the hills above to ensure the safety of their Catholic neighbours
hearing mass by the river in the valley below. Another example of such
kindness comes from the story of a woman who was to be evicted from her
home in the parish by bailiffs because she could not pay her rent; one
of the soldiers took pity on her and passed around an iron cooking pot,
collecting money from the other soldiers until enough was donated such
that the woman's rent could be paid. Mass was most recently celebrated
at this mass rock in the Jubilee Year 2000; it was concelebrated by PP
Fr. Tom Finnegan, Canon Mohan and Fr. Michael J. Gilsenan and attended
by a large congregation.

The ceremony served to memorialise the victims of the penal laws, which
climaxed in the tragedy of The Great Famine. Catholic Emancipation saw
an explosion in the number of Roman Catholic churches and schools built
in Ireland.

St. Molua's cemetery contains the remains of both Protestants and
Catholics and was cleared from its overgrown condition in the 1980s, to
much acclaim. (All cemeteries in the parish are immaculately
maintained). In the 1970s, however, both the interior and exterior of
Ss. Peter & Paul church (a 'barn church' constructed in 1825) were
extensively damaged as a result of perhaps well-meaning but nonetheless
gravely ill-conceived 'renovations' by then parish priest, Canon Drum,
much to the consternation of locals who wished to continue worshiping at
the altar built by their ancestors as an expression of their civic pride
in the climate of Catholic Emancipation.

The Ss. Peter & Paul church still includes an intricate wooden ceiling.
Constructed on an eastâ€“west axis, facing the rising sun (a symbol of
Christ - The Celtic cross features the rising sun, a Celtic symbol,
fused with a cross, as a symbol of the new Christian faith conquering
the ancient pagan one), the building is renowned for its light and
spaciousness. Its Turnerelli altar and side altars, redoros, mosaics,
galleries and pipe organ, were all lost. Two stone crosses were also
removed from the pinnacles of the exterior gables and replaced with iron
crosses.

In 2000, the bell was electrified and the wheel and chain of this
Victorian cast iron bell were removed and have since disappeared.

## Music

The nineteenth century harper Patrick Byrne was a native of the parish.
Born and raised in the town-land of Greaghlone, he went on to achieve
international fame, becoming the first person ever photographed while
playing a harp.

He retired to the townland of Beagh at the end of his life and is buried
in Carrickmacross. A monument to the blind harper was recently erected
by Magheracloone Heritage Group at the Ball Alley junction along the
Carrickmacross-Kingscourt road (which passes through Magheracloone). A
GAA sports ground and community centre are located next to this
monument. Local harpist and All-Ireland medal winner, Rosey McCabe,
played some traditional tunes at the unveiling.

## Amenities

Magheracloone is also home to several businesses, shops (including
O'Rourke's service station and McGrane's 'Country Store') and numerous
schools including Drumgossatt National School (formerly a barn church
until Ss Peter & Paul was constructed); it has recently been extended to
accommodate a significant increase in numbers.

## Sport

The local Gaelic football team Magheracloone Mitchells won the Monaghan
Senior Football Championship in 2004. They have achieved runner-up
status three times; in 2002, 2005 and 2006. Their colours are those of
the parish, being simply black and white. Senior Gaelic footballer
Thomas Freeman was presented with a GAA All Star award in 2007 and his
brother, Damien Freeman is a former captain of county Monaghan's Gaelic
football team. The parish also boasts under-14 boys' & girls' Olympic
Handball teams. The boys' team achieved all-Ireland runner-up and the
girls' team came 1st in Ireland in 2006.

## Sinkholes

In September 2018 a sinkhole made the local GAA pitch subside and
Dromgossatt National School was evacuated. It happened in land over an
old gypsum mine.

In April 2020 a crown hole appeared in land over the mine.

## Notable people