# Westport, County Mayo

Westport (Irish: Cathair na Mart, meaning 'the stone fort of the
beeves', historically anglicised as Cahernamart) is a town in County
Mayo in Ireland. It is at the south-east corner of Clew Bay, an inlet of
the Atlantic Ocean on the west coast of Ireland. Westport is a tourist
destination and scores highly for quality of life. It won the Irish Tidy
Towns Competition three times in 2001, 2006 and 2008. In 2012 it won the
Best Place to Live in Ireland competition run by The Irish Times.

Westport is designated as a heritage town, and is one of only a few
planned towns in Ireland. The town centre was laid-out in the Georgian
architectural style, and incorporates the Carrow Beg river into the
design composition. This provides for tree lined promenades (known as
The Mall) and several stone bridges.

The pilgrimage mountain of Croagh Patrick, known locally as "the Reek",
lies some 10 km west of the town near the villages of Murrisk and
Lecanvey. The mountain forms the backdrop to the town.

## History

### Name

Westport originates and gets its name in the Irish language from a 16th-
century castle - Cathair na Mart (meaning "the stone fort of the
beeves"- and surrounding settlement, belonging to the powerful local
seafaring Ó Máille clan, who controlled the Clew Bay area, then known as
Umaill.

### Development

The original village of Cathair na Mart existed somewhere around what is
now the front (east) lawn of Westport House. It had a high street,
alleys down to the river and a population of around 700. A small port
also existed at the mouth of the Carrowbeg river. Roads lead from the
village to the west (West Road), the south (Sandy Hill Road) and the
east (Old Paddock Road). The intention of John Browne, later the First
Earl of Altamont to move the existing Cahernamart settlement to
facilitate the landscaping of parklands around Westport House was
outlined to Richard Pococke when he visited Browne in 1752.

The first clear evidence for the development of the new town is in an
advertisement in Faulkner's Dublin Journal on 17 March 1767, stating 'a
New Town is immediately to be built near the old town of
Westport...according to Plans and Elevations already prepared'. The
focal point was to be a 'large and elegant market house' situated in an
octagonal market area enclosed by 12 'large well-finished slated Houses.
There were to be 'three avenues for streets of thirty slated Houses' and
'several very large streets for great numbers of thatched Houses and
cabbins, to be built separately' at a cost of 20-40 guineas each.
Workmen were to contact Peter Brown-Kelly, son of the Earl or the
architect William Leeson

Westport is designated as a heritage town and is unusual in Ireland in
that it is one of only a few planned towns in the country.
Unfortunately, the original plans for the town are not available.

Its layout follows the medieval principles of urban design introduced by
the Normans in the 13th century. A particular feature is the
incorporation of the river into the composition, contained for two
blocks by low stone walls producing, on each side of the river, tree-
lined promenades (The Mall) with several stone bridges over the river
Carrow Beg. The Malls were built by the First Marquess of Sligo after
1800. William Bald's map of Mayo which Was surveyed between 1809 and
1817, as well as Henry Browne's map from the same period, shows that the
basic framework of Westport's streets including the Malls was present.

In 1778 Peter Browne, 2nd Earl of Altamont engaged James Wyatt
(1746-1813) to redesign parts of Westport House, including its dining
room. This led to a lasting belief that the well-known Wyatt designed
the town, but work was already well advanced on the town when he started
work. If he did have any design input into the town project it could
only have been to later stages such as the Malls. Westport House was
originally built by Richard Cassels (also known as Richard Castle), the
German architect, in the 1730s, near the site of the original Ó Máille
Castle.

### Revolutionary period

After the Easter Rising, in Westport over 30 Irish Volunteers and Sinn
Fein supporters were arrested by the RIC under the Defence of the Realm
Act 1914 on the orders of Resident magistrate John Charles Milling and
the local District Inspector, Shore.

Those arrested included Joe Ring, Tom Derrig and PJ Doris, editor of the
Mayo News. They were sent to Frongoch internment camp in Wales. Joe Ring
and others were released at Christmas 1916.

On 29 March 1919, Milling, resident magistrate to County Mayo since
1915, was killed by the Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB) at his home
on Newport Road, Westport.

During the Irish War of Independence, on 26 March 1921, following the
killing of a constable by the IRA four days earlier, the Westport RIC
left their barracks to punish the town and area. Homes and businesses of
IRA families were targeted. The home and business of Charles Hughes,
chairman of the Urban District Council,  was destroyed. Similarly
destroyed was the pub and shop of Thaddeus Walsh, chairman of the Rural
District Council. Other houses in the town and houses in Carrowkennedy,
Drummindoo and Carrowbawn were destroyed or burned. The IRA were not
deterred by the destruction.

A company of the Auxiliary Division of the Royal Irish Constabulary were
based in Westport from June 1921.

Following the Anglo-Irish Treaty, the Royal Irish Constabulary pulled
out of their barracks for the last time on Monday 12 February 1922 and
formally handed over the next day.

### Civil War

Early in the Civil War Mayo including Westport was controlled by the
Anti-Treaty side.  On the evening of 1 April 1922 Joe Ring was arrested
in Westport by the IRA and held in Castlebar jail on charges of
recruiting for the new National Army. He went on hunger strike and he
was released on 13 April and received a hero's welcome in Westport.

A cross-channel ferry, the SS Minerva, was kitted out as a troop carrier
by the National Army and left North Wall Dublin on 22 July, sailing
around Ireland and arriving in Clew Bay on 24 July 1922. Col. Comdt.
Christopher (‘Kit’) O’Malley from the Dublin Guard was in command and
accompanied by Brigadier-General Joe Ring. It carried 400 troops and a
Rolls-Royce 1920-pattern armoured car, nicknamed the Big Fella, with a
Vickers machine gun and an 18-pounder artillery as well as 600 rifles
and 150 bicycles. It anchored off Inishlyre. General Ring led a
successful landing by sea. First the Coastguard station at Rosmoney was
captured by 40 National Army troops, freeing 90 pro-treaty prisoners who
were held there. Ring then landed his men and armoured car at Westport
Quay. The Republicans, who had not at all expected their arrival, set
fire to the barracks and withdrew from the town. The pro-treaty forces
were stationed at Westport Town Hall. The troops billeted at there shot
off the head of the Clendenning statue.

### Modern period

Since the late 20th century, Westport has expanded with several new
housing estates. Some of these include Springfield, the Carrowbeg
Estate, Horkans Hill, Cedar Park, Fairways, Knockranny Village and
Sharkey Hill.

### Westport House

The original house was built by Colonel John Browne, a Jacobite, who was
at the Siege of Limerick, and his wife Maude Bourke. Maude Bourke was
Grace O'Malley's great-great-granddaughter. The house then did not have
a lake or a dam, and the tide rose and fell against the walls.Peter
Browne, 2nd Earl of Altamont acquired slave plantations in Jamaica by
marriage. His grandson Howe Peter Browne (2nd Marquess of Sligo) was the
Governor of Jamaica when the slaves were freed.

Designed by the architects Richard Cassels, Thomas Ivory and James Wyatt
in the 18th century, Westport House is situated in a parkland setting
with a lake, terraces, gardens and views overlooking Clew Bay, the
Atlantic Ocean, Achill, Clare Island and Ireland's Holy Mountain, Croagh
Patrick.

In January 2017, it was announced that a local family had purchased the
house and grounds.

## Economy

AbbVie a global biopharmaceutical company employs 1,400 people in
Westport. AbbVie acquired Allergan in 2020. The global clothing
manufacturing company and family business Portwest is based in Westport
and was founded there in 1904.

## Demographics

Between the censuses of 2011 and 2016, the town showed a limited growth
from 5,543 to 6,198 inhabitants.

## Culture

People from Westport town are traditionally known as "Coveys". Some
decades ago the Covey dialect still existed and was unintelligible to
outsiders. For example, the Covey word for a woman was a "doner".

Matt Molloy of the Chieftains has a pub and music venue on Bridge
Street.

Another entertainment venue is the Westport Town Hall Theatre on the
Octagon. This was established in the early 1900s, and renovated and
refurbished in 2015. The theatre hosts events, artists and musicians,
local theatre groups and children's puppet shows.

The Custom House Studios and Gallery is the centre of the local arts
scene.

## Media

### Newspaper

Westport has a regional newspaper based in the town, The Mayo News,
founded in 1892 by William and Patrick Dorris. Other newspapers
available are the Mayo Advertiser, Western People and the Connaught
Telegraph.

### Radio

Local radio is delivered by Westport Radio 98.2 FM.

## Tourism

Westport is County Mayo's premier tourist destination, visited by
holidaymakers from all over the world and Ireland.

In 1842, the English novelist, William Makepeace Thackeray, visited
Westport and wrote of the town:

"The most beautiful view I ever saw in the world. It forms an event in
one's life to have seen that place so beautiful that is it, and so
unlike other beauties that I know of. Were such beauties lying on
English shores it would be a world's wonder perhaps, if it were on the
Mediterranean or Baltic, English travellers would flock to it by
hundreds, why not come and see it in Ireland!"

Visitors visit Westport for the scenery, the pubs and restaurants in the
town, blue flag beaches, and Croagh Patrick. Its proximity to Connemara,
Achill, Clew Bay and Croagh Patrick, and its hotels and guest houses,
make it a base for holidaymakers to tour the region.

Westport House and its Pirate Adventure Park attracts families. Westport
has an 18-hole golf course and nearby a 9-hole course.

In January 2008, Westport became Google Earth's first fully 3D town.

### Festivals and events

Several festivals and events are held in and around Westport each year.
These include the Westport Music and Arts Festival (which was rebranded
as "Westival" in 2018 and moved from September to October), a Croagh
Patrick walking festival in March, a sea angling festival in June, and
The Saltwater Festival (of "Music, Food, Art & Culture") in May.

## Religion

There are four churches in the town: The Elim Pentecostal church;
Amazing Grace Fellowship, the Catholic Church, St Mary's; the Anglican
church, Holy Trinity; the Evangelical church, Calvary Church Westport;

In 1787 Lord Altamont gave the Catholic Parish Priest Dr Charles Lynagh
a lease for a Catholic chapel and parochial house at Riverside. A
temporary structure may have been erected as the chapel was not
commenced for a quarter century later. The foundation stone was laid in
1813. Dr Oliver Kelly received support in this from Catholics and
Protestants alike. The building was of cut stone in the Gothic revival
style, and fronted onto the Malls which were under construction. The
cost of the church was about £6000. By the 1920s the original gothic
building was too small and the administrator Father Patterson raised
funds for a new church. This cost £30000 and incorporated the old gothic
facade in the Mall. The dedication occurred in 1932. Work began to build
the present St Mary's church in 1957 with the demolition of the old
church and completed by 1961.

The old parish church of the Church of Ireland was built in 1797 beside
the Carrowbeg River in the demesne of Westport House. That first church
cost £617. 10s. 9d which was a gift from the Board of First Fruits, a
body established to fund the building and repair of church buildings in
the Church of Ireland in the late eighteenth and nineteenth century.
William Thackeray described a 'pretty little church' on the 'pleasure
grounds surrounding Westport House. The ruins of the church are still
visible today.

By 1855 the Church of Ireland Community was too large for the existing
church  due to the expansion of the town and the growth of tourism. Not
everyone could be accommodated at services and the building was in
serious disrepair. The local Select Vestry promised a local contribution
of £1200 on condition that the church would be rebuilt in its existing
site. In 1868  an appeal was launched which announced that the Marquess
of Sligo had donated by the Marquess of Sligo (the present location on
Newport Road. The first plans were approved by Joseph Welland in 1869,
these were not used apart from the distinctive pencil spire. Thomas
Newenham Deane designed the second church. Holy Trinity church displays
many features of the neo-Gothic style favoured by John Ruskin. The new
Church was consecrated by the Lord Bishop of Tuam in 1872. The three
main doors are made of iron wrought to create floral forms. The vestry
door is on the East Side and is made of wood. The interior of the church
is highly decorated. The upper walls of the nave are decorated with
murals depicting scenes from the Gospels, erected around 1878. Canon
James Owen Hannay whose pen name was George A. Birmingham  served as
rector from 1892 to 1913. By 1984 the restoration of the church became
necessary and as there were only 40 parishioners remaining a Restoration
Committee was formed with six Holy Trinity parishioners and six from St.
Mary's Catholic Church. A total of £50,000 was raised by 1986 and the
work completed.

In 2004 during the structural repairs of St. Mary's church the Select
Vestry in Holy Trinity were able to offer St Mary's parishioners
hospitality. Weekday and some weekend Masses were celebrated in Holy
Trinity.

Historically, a Methodist church existed on the Mall and a Presbyterian
church on Distillery Road.

Church records for the 19th century (Church of Ireland, Methodist, Roman
Catholic, civil, gravestone inscriptions, etc.) and other historical
records for the Westport area are held at the South Mayo Family Research
Centre in Ballinrobe and the Clew Bay Heritage Centre at Westport Quay.

### Religious Orders

The two main religious orders historically associated with Westport are
the Congregation of Christian Brothers and the Sisters of Mercy. Dean
Bernard Burke wrote to the founder of the Sisters of Mercy Catherine
McAuley in 1841 asking for sisters for Westport. None were immediately
available but following a renewed request six months after the death of
the foundress, the first three sisters arrived in Westport on 9
September 1842. The Dean gave them his own house, Carrowbeg House as a
temporary residence, while he went into lodgings for two years.  On 24
December 1842 Lord Altamont agreed to Dean Burke's request for a site
for a Convent for the Sisters. Dean Burke travelled all over Ireland and
raised £3000 for the project. In the spring of 1843, the foundation
stone of the new Convent was laid and the Convent built by John Gibbons
to the same plan as the Convent in Carlow. Sister Paul Cullen was
appointed by Archbishop McHale as the first Reverend Mother of the new
convent. She was a sister of  Cardinal Paul Cullen.

The Congregation of Christian Brothers arrived in Westport in 1865.
They took over the Castlebar Street School for Primary and Secondary
students. Initially, they were accommodated in Carrowbeg House. In 1922
they acquired Grove House on Mill Street from the Sisters of Mercy. Then
they moved to their new residence on Newport Road where they lived until
they left Westport in 2002

## Education

Westport has two secondary schools, five primary schools and Westport
College of Further Education, which opened in 2009.

The secondary schools are Rice College (528 pupils, all-boys) and Sacred
Heart School (over 500 pupils, all-girls).

In 2006, Scoil Phadraig na mBráithre (tr. Saint Patrick's Christian
Brothers' School) and Saint Patrick's Mercy National School amalgamated
to form Scoil Phádraig (tr. St Patrick's School), a Catholic primary
school under the patronage of the Archbishop of Tuam. It is the largest
primary school in Westport with 300+ pupils and is located on Newport
Road on the site of the old Christian Brothers School.

An all-Irish Catholic Primary School, Gaelscoil na Cruaiche was founded
in 1995. It received official recognition in 2000 and moved into a
permanent school building in June 2011. There are currently 207 pupils
attending the school with eleven teachers.

Holy Trinity National School is a Co-educational National School on
Newport Road under the patronage of the Church of Ireland.

The Newport Road School was a Church of Ireland school for boys and
girls set up under the Kildare Street and Tuam Diocesan Societies and
lodged in a new building (later called the lecture hall). The building
was declared unfit following an inspection in 2010. The school is
currently full with 62 pupils.

In February 2022 it was announced that the new school will be located on
the grounds of the former Scoil Padraig on Altamont Street and not co-
located with Educate together as previously stated. In 2020 staff and
pupils had objected to the school being Co-located with Westport Educate
Together

The Quay School, also known as Saint Columbkille's Primary School is
located at the Quay, Westport.

A new primary school, Westport Educate Together opened in 2019. At first
located at Sharkey Hill Community Centre, it is moving to new temporary
premises at Westport Woods Hotel for the 2022–23 school year.

### History

The educational facilities for boys in Westport were for many years
associated with the Congregation of Christian Brothers. The first of
these facilities was established in Castlebar Street in 1865 before
transferring to the Newport road in 1962 where the former national
school can still be seen today.

In 1987 the secondary school Rice College was built on Castlebar Road in
order to cater for the increased educational requirements.

## Transport

### Rail

The town is the terminus of a 250 km Dublin-Westport/Galway railway line
from Dublin Heuston in Dublin. This railway connects the town to
Castlebar. Westport railway station opened on 28 January 1866. The line
originally ran through to Westport Quay station (opened on 1 January
1875 and closed in April 1977). This line was lifted overnight in 1977
by Córas Iompair Éireann (CIÉ). In order to pacify local concern, the
bulk of the trackbed of this extension was converted to a public
walkway, still open today. There was also a branch to Achill Island
branching off after the station, but this closed in 1937.

### Bicycle

The Great Western Greenway is a greenway rail trail that follows the
route of the former Midland Great Western Railway branch line to Achill,
via Newport and Mulranny.

### Road

The N5 national primary route also connects the town to Castlebar, as
well as connecting to the N4 near Longford that leads onward to Dublin.
The other major road passing through Westport is the N59 national
secondary route.

### Air

The regional airport is Ireland West Airport Knock, 60 km (37 mi) away.

### Port (Westport Quay)

Westport has a small adjoining port, the quay, once busy but no longer
used for commercial shipping. In 1894, the harbour was the scene of the
Clew Bay Drowning.

The quay is situated some distance from the deep waters of Clew Bay, a
defensive advantage in the towns development which was noted in an Irish
Times article of 1884:

 "The port of Westport somewhat resembles Sligo and Ballina in regard to
its inaccessibility from the sea. The ancient West Coast population were
not anxious to be within easy reach of the pirates and freebooters, who
dwelt in the islands or on remote promontories, and accordingly the
wealthier inhabitants built their towns where opportunities existed for
ensuring a de-fence against a sudden landing. The channel leading from
Westport quay is nearly six miles long before it reaches the roadstead
of Innislyre, in which ships of burden can anchor or make an immediate
run out to sea."

The quay area is now home to a number of warehouse conversions, and has
several restaurants and pubs. The Clew Bay Heritage Centre, a small
museum celebrating the history of Westport and the maritime history of
Clew Bay, is open to the public here.

## Sport

The Gaelic football club, Westport United soccer club and the rugby club
have competed in county and national events. Westport, and the
surrounding region, has been identified as a primary centre for
adventure sports by Fáilte Ireland. Every August it hosts the largest
one-day adventure multi-sport race of its kind in the world – Gael Force
West. It is also home to horse riding, surfing, sea kayaking,
windsurfing and sailing schools and other adventure sports.

### Angling

Westport is an angling centre providing sea fishing on Clew Bay and game
and coarse fishing on nearby loughs and rivers.

Clew Bay is also a sea angling centre hosting several sea fishing
competitions each year, and is known as a venue for common skate
fishing. It holds the Irish record for a 160 lb white skate. It is also
home to tope, huss and ray.

### Gaelic games

The Westport GAA club, CLG Chathair na Mart, have a history going back
to the nineteenth century. Gaelic football is the main sport played
within the club.

### Golf

Westport Golf Club (championship) was in 2009 ranked 43rd out of the top
100 golf courses in Ireland by Golf Digest. The Golfers Guide to Ireland
2016 voted Westport as the best Parkland in Connaught for the second
time in the preceding three years. It has hosted a number of
tournaments, including the Ladies Home Internationals in 1989 and the
Irish Amateur Close Championship on three occasions, the last time in
1997. It also hosted the Irish PGA Championship in 2002.

### Soccer

Westport United football club was founded in 1911. Westport United won
the FAI Junior Cup in 2005 in Kilkenny and play their home matches in
the newly developed United Park, which opened in September 2016.
Westport United still uses the Sports Park for some underage games. The
club colours are red and black. Westport also won the Connaught Cup in
1942, 1945, 1949, 1961, 1974, 1987 and 2012 along with numerous Mayo
titles. Westport United's training ground is located in The Quay area.

### Rugby

Westport Rugby Club are located in Carrowholly, a few kilometres outside
the town. League and Cawley cup champions in 2016 and junior cup
champions in 2015.

### Basketball

Westport Warriors Basketball Club run for all different age groups and
are part of the MABB League.

## Notable people

Cornelius Coughlan (1828–1915), Irish recipient of Victoria Cross, died
and buried in Westport

George A. Birmingham (1865–1950), writer, rector of Holy Trinity Church,
Westport. His play General John Regan caused a riot when staged in
Westport.

John MacBride (1868–1916), Born in Westport, he was executed in 1916 for
his part in the Easter Rising; He is commemorated by a monument on the
Mall; He was the father of Nobel peace laureate Seán MacBride

Joseph Maher (1933–1998), actor

Séamus Hughes (born 1952), politician; Fianna Fáil Teachta Dála (TD) for
the Mayo West constituency

Michael Ring (born 1953), Fine Gael politician; Teachta Dála (TD) for
the Mayo constituency

Lee Keegan (born 1989), Gaelic footballer

Conor O'Malley (born 1994), footballer

## International ties

Westport is twinned with Plougastel-Daoulas in Brittany, France and with
Limavady, County Londonderry, Northern Ireland. The link with the latter
has its roots in the 1980s and the official ratification and twinning
ceremony took place in 2002.

Since 1982, Westport also has had a partnership with the town of Aror,
Kenya, and the people of Westport have contributed to improving the
infrastructure of Aror.

## See also

List of towns and villages in Ireland

## References

## Sources

Peadar O Flanagan, "An Outline History of the Town of Westport. Part 1.
The origins and early development of the town 1750–80", in Cathar na
Mart: The Journal of the Westport Historical Society; volume 1, part I,
1981; parts II-IV in volumes 2, 3 and 4, 1982–84.

Kieran Clarke, "Clew Bay boating disaster", in Cathar na Mart; 6, 1986.

Brendan Jeffars, Westport – an early Irish example of town planning,
1734–1950, Cahar na Mart; 8, 1988.

Jarlath Duffy, "The port of Westport, 1800–1850", in Cathar na Mart; 15,
pp. 1–14, 1995.

Vincent Keane,  "Westport and the Irish Volunteers. Part I:the early
years, 1914–1916", Cathar na Mart; 22, pp. 84–88, 2002

## External links