# Nine Years' War (Ireland)

The Nine Years' War, sometimes called Tyrone's Rebellion, took place in
Ireland from 1593 to 1603. It was fought between an Irish
confederation—led mainly by Hugh O'Neill of Tyrone and Hugh Roe
O'Donnell of Tyrconnell—against English rule in Ireland, and was a
response to the ongoing Tudor conquest of Ireland. The war began in
Ulster and northern Connacht, but eventually engulfed the entire island.
The Irish alliance won numerous victories against the English forces in
Ireland, such as the Battle of Clontibret (1595) and the Battle of the
Yellow Ford (1598), but the English won a pivotal victory against the
alliance and their Spanish allies in the siege of Kinsale (1601–02). The
war ended with the Treaty of Mellifont (1603). Many of the defeated
northern lords left Ireland to seek support for a new uprising in the
Flight of the Earls (1607), never to return. This marked the end of
Gaelic Ireland and led to the Plantation of Ulster.

The war against O'Neill and his allies was the largest conflict fought
by England in the Elizabethan era. At the height of the conflict
(1600–1601) more than 18,000 soldiers were fighting in the English army
in Ireland. By contrast, the English army assisting the Dutch during the
Eighty Years' War was never more than 12,000 strong at any one time.

## Causes

The Nine Years' War was caused by the clashes between the Gaelic Irish
lord Hugh O'Neill and the advance of the English state in Ireland, from
control over the Pale to ruling the whole island. In resisting this
advance, O'Neill managed to rally other Irish septs who were
dissatisfied with English government and some Catholics who opposed the
spread of Protestantism in Ireland.

### Rise of Hugh O'Neill

Hugh O'Neill came from the powerful Ó Néill sept of Tír Eoghain, which
dominated the centre of the northern province of Ulster.3 His father,
Matthew O'Neill, Baron Dungannon, was the reputed son of Conn O'Neill
the Lame, the first O'Neill to be created Earl of Tyrone by the English
Crown. Matthew O'Neill had been appointed by Conn as his heir, whereas
Conn's eldest surviving son Shane O'Neill was the preferred heir
according to the Irish custom of tanistry. After a period of warfare,
Shane had Matthew murdered and became O'Neill after his father died.
After the murder of Matthew's first heir, Brian, the English authorities
spirited the next heir Hugh out of Tyrone to be brought up with the
Hovenden family in the Pale. At the parliament of 1585, Hugh O'Neill
requested and was granted his English law birthright to the title of
Earl of Tyrone. Prior to this and for several years afterwards Hugh
O'Neill warred with the aging reigning chief of Tyrone, Turlough Lynagh
O'Neill for control of Tyrone. Turlough died in 1595 allowing Hugh to be
inaugurated "the O'Neill". Hugh however had also ruthlessly murdered his
chief competitor to the title, Shane's son Hugh Gavelagh O'Neill. He
also had sub-chiefs who wouldn't toe the line murdered such as Phelim
McTurlough O'Neill, lord of Killetra.

From Hugh Roe O'Donnell, his ally, Hugh O'Neill enlisted Scottish
mercenaries (known as Redshanks). Within his own territories, O'Neill
was entitled to limited military service from his sub-lords or uirithe.
He also recruited his tenants and dependants into military service and
tied the peasantry to the land to increase food production (see Kern).
In addition, he hired large contingents of Irish mercenaries (known as
buanadha) under leaders such as Richard Tyrrell. To arm his soldiers,
O'Neill bought muskets, ammunition, and pikes from Scotland and England.
From 1591, O'Donnell, on O'Neill's behalf, had been in contact with
Philip II of Spain, appealing for military aid against their common
enemy and citing also their shared Catholicism. With the aid of Spain,
O'Neill could arm and feed over 8,000 men, unprecedented for a Gaelic
lord, and leaving him well prepared to resist English incursions into
Ulster.

### Crown advances into Ulster

By the early 1590s, the north of Ireland was attracting the attention of
Lord Deputy Fitzwilliam, who had been charged with bringing the area
under crown control. A provincial presidency was proposed; the candidate
for office was Henry Bagenal, an English colonist settled in Newry, who
would seek to impose the authority of the crown through sheriffs to be
appointed by the Dublin government. O'Neill had eloped with Bagenal's
sister, Mabel, and married her against her brother's wishes; the
bitterness of this episode was made more intense after Mabel's early
death a few years after the marriage, when she was reportedly in despair
about her husband's neglect and his mistresses.

In 1591, Fitzwilliam broke up the MacMahon lordship in Monaghan when The
MacMahon, hereditary leader of the sept, resisted the imposition of an
English sheriff; he was hanged and his lordship divided. There was an
outcry, with several sources alleging corruption against Fitzwilliam,
but the same policy was soon applied in Longford (territory of the
O'Farrells) and East Breifne (Cavan – territory of the O'Reillys). Any
attempt to further the same in the O'Neill and O'Donnell territories was
bound to be resisted by force of arms.

The most significant difficulty for English forces in confronting
O'Neill lay in the natural defences that Ulster enjoyed. By land there
were only two viable points of entry to the province for troops marching
from the south: at Newry in the east, and Sligo in the west – the
terrain in between was largely mountains, woodland, bog, and marshes.
Sligo Castle was held by the O'Connor sept, but suffered constant threat
from the O'Donnells; the route from Newry into the heart of Ulster ran
through several easily defended passes and could only be maintained in
wartime with a punishing sacrifice by the Crown of men and money.

The English did have a foothold within Ulster, around Carrickfergus
north of Belfast Lough, where a small colony had been planted in the
1570s; but here too the terrain was unfavorable for the English, since
Lough Neagh and the river Bann, the lower stretch of which ran through
the dense forest of Glenconkeyn, formed an effective barrier on the
eastern edge of the O'Neill territory. A further difficulty lay in the
want of a port on the northern sea coast where the English might launch
an amphibious attack into O'Neill's rear. The English strategic
situation was complicated by interference from Scots clans, which were
supplying O'Neill with soldiers and materials and playing upon the
English need for local assistance, while keeping an eye to their own
territorial influence in the Route (modern County Antrim).

## War breaks out

In 1592, Hugh Roe O'Donnell had driven an English sheriff, Captain
Willis, out of his territory, Tyrconnell (now part of County Donegal).
In 1593, Maguire supported by troops out of Tyrone led by Hugh O'Neill's
brother, Cormac MacBaron, had combined to resist Willis' introduction as
Sheriff into Maguire's Fermanagh. After Willis was expelled from
Fermanagh, Maguire, with the aid of MacBaron, launched punishing raids
into northern Connacht, burning villages around Ballymote Castle.

Maguire launched a more ambitious raid into Connacht during June, when
he clashed with forces led by the governor of Connacht, Sir Richard
Bingham, but the English were beaten back and Maguire continued to spoil
thorough Roscommon before returning north. In response, the crown forces
were gathered under the command of Sir Henry Bagenal, who launched an
expedition into Monaghan, then Fermanagh, to crush Maguire and his
allies, receiving his commission on 11 September 1593. Bagenal had under
his command 144 horse, 763 foot, and 118 kern, to which O'Neill was to
bring a further 200 horse and 1,200 foot. Bagenal entered Fermanagh on
22 September and was joined by O'Neill four days later. Unable to make a
crossing of the River Erne, Bagenal and O'Neill marched (separately)
northwards to the northern end of Lower Lough Erne. Blocking forces were
posted by Maguire at the ford of Belleek, but these were overcome by
Bagenal and O'Neill at the Battle of Belleek on 10 October.

Initially O'Neill assisted the English, hoping to be named as Lord
President of Ulster himself. Elizabeth I, though, had feared that
O'Neill had no intention of being a simple landlord and that his
ambition was to usurp her authority and be "a Prince of Ulster". For
this reason she refused to grant O'Neill provincial presidency or any
other position which would have given him authority to govern Ulster on
the crown's behalf. Once it became clear that Henry Bagenal was marked
to assume the presidency of Ulster, O'Neill accepted that an English
offensive was inevitable, and so joined his allies in open rebellion in
February 1595, with an assault on the Blackwater Fort, which guarded a
strategic bridge on the River Blackwater.

Later in 1595 O'Neill and O'Donnell wrote to King Philip II of Spain for
help, and offered to be his vassals. Philip proposed that his cousin
Archduke Albert be made Prince of Ireland, but nothing came of this. A
truce in late 1595 was followed by the submission of Hugh Maguire in
April 1596, and Tyrone promised to explain his conduct before the Queen
in London, but the arrival of three Spanish envoys from Philip II in
1596 promising men and supplies ended any chances of peace. An
unsuccessful armada sailed in 1596; the war in Ireland became a part of
the wider Anglo-Spanish War.

### Irish victory at Yellow Ford

The English authorities in Dublin Castle had been slow to comprehend the
scale of the rebellion. After failed negotiations in 1595, English
armies tried to break into Ulster but were repulsed by a trained army
including musketeers in prepared positions; after a stinging defeat at
the Battle of Clontibret, successive English offensives were driven back
in the following years. At the Battle of the Yellow Ford in 1598 up to
2,000 English troops were killed after being attacked on the march to
Armagh. The rest were surrounded in Armagh itself but negotiated safe
passage for themselves in return for evacuating the town. O'Neill's
personal enemy, Sir Henry Bagenal, had been in command of the army and
was killed during the early engagements. It was the heaviest defeat ever
suffered by the English army in Ireland up to that point.

The victory prompted uprisings all over the country, with the assistance
of mercenaries in O'Neill's pay and contingents from Ulster, and it is
at this point that the war developed in its full force. Hugh O'Neill
appointed his supporters as chieftains and earls around the country,
notably James Fitzthomas Fitzgerald as the Earl of Desmond and Florence
MacCarthy as the MacCarthy Mór. In Munster as many as 9,000 men came out
in rebellion. The Munster Plantation, the colonisation of the province
with English settlers, was dealt a serious blow; the colonists, among
them Edmund Spenser, fled for their lives.

Only a handful of native lords remained consistently loyal to either
side, and loyalties were complicated by splits within clans. However all
the fortified cities and towns of the country sided with the English
colonial government. Hugh O'Neill, unable to take walled towns, made
repeated overtures to inhabitants of the Pale to join his rebellion,
appealing to their Catholicism and to their alienation from the Dublin
government and the provincial administrations. For the most part,
however, the Old English remained hostile to their hereditary Gaelic
enemies. The English fortress at Castle Maine surrendered in November
1599 after a thirteen month siege.

### Earl of Essex's command

In 1599, Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex arrived in Ireland with over
17,000 English troops. He took the advice of the Irish privy council, to
settle the south of the country with garrisons before making an attempt
on Ulster, but this dissipated his forces and he ended up suffering
numerous setbacks on a desultory progress through south Leinster and
Munster. He spent almost all of his time in Ireland awaiting transport
that he had been promised before setting out, it being the only
effective way of reaching his stated objective of Lough Foyle; however,
a lack of administrative efficiency in England caused his plans to go
awry and the requisite pack animals and ships were never sent. Those
expeditions he did organise were disastrous, especially an expedition
crossing the Curlew mountains to Sligo, which was mauled by O'Donnell at
the Battle of Curlew Pass. Thousands of his troops, shut up in
unsanitary garrisons, died of diseases such as typhoid and dysentery.

When he did turn to Ulster, Essex entered a parley with O'Neill and
agreed a truce that was heavily criticised by his enemies in London,
despite Elizabeth's admission soon afterward that it was "so seasonably
made...as great good...has grown by it." Anticipating a recall to
England, he set out for London in 1599 without the Queen's permission,
where he was executed after attempting a court putsch. He was succeeded
in Ireland by Lord Mountjoy, who proved to be a far more able commander,
though his greater success could just as well have been because he was
provided with all of the administrative support Essex lacked. In
addition, two veterans of Irish warfare, George Carew and Arthur
Chichester, were given commands in Munster and Ulster respectively.

In November 1599 O'Neill sent a 22-paragraph document to Queen
Elizabeth, listing his terms for a peace agreement. These called for a
self-governing Ireland with restitution of confiscated lands and
churches, freedom of movement, and a strong Roman Catholic identity. In
respect of Irish sovereignty he now accepted English overlordship, but
requested that the viceroy ".. be at least an earl, and of the privy
council of England". Elizabeth's adviser Sir Robert Cecil commented in
the margin of the document, with the word "Ewtopia".

### End of the Rebellion in Munster

George Carew, the English Lord President of Munster, managed more or
less to quash the rebellion in Munster by mid-1601, using a mixture of
conciliation and force. By the summer of 1601 he had retaken most of the
principal castles in Munster and scattered the Irish forces. He did this
by negotiating a pact with Florence MacCarthy, the principal Gaelic
Irish leader in the province, which allowed MacCarthy to be neutral,
while Carew concentrated on attacking the force of James Fitzthomas
Fitzgerald, who commanded the main rebel force. As a result, while
MacCarthy resisted English raiding parties into his territory, he did
not come to Fitzthomas's aid, despite urgings from O'Neill and O'Donnell
to do this.

In the summer of 1600, Carew launched an offensive against Fitzthomas's
forces. The English routed Fitzthomas' forces at Aherlow and in
November, Carew reported to London that he had, over the summer, killed
1,200 'rebels' and taken the surrenders of over 10,000. Carew also
weakened Florence MacCarthy's position by recruiting a rival MacCarthy
chieftain, Donal, to English service.

In June 1601, James Fitzthomas was captured by the English forces.
Shortly afterwards, Carew had Florence MacCarthy arrested after
summoning him for negotiations. Both Fitzthomas and MacCarthy were held
captive in the Tower of London, where Fitzthomas eventually died. Most
of the rest of the local lords submitted, once the principal native
leaders had been arrested. O'Neill's mercenaries had been expelled from
the province.

### Battle of Kinsale and the collapse of the rebellion

Mountjoy managed to penetrate the interior of Ulster by seaborne
landings at Derry (then belonging to County Coleraine) under Henry
Docwra and Carrickfergus under Arthur Chichester. Dowcra and Chichester,
helped by Niall Garve O'Donnell, a rival of Hugh Roe, devastated the
countryside in an effort to provoke a famine and killed the civilian
population at random.

Their military assumption was that without crops and people or cattle,
the rebels could neither feed themselves nor raise new fighters. This
attrition quickly began to bite, and it also meant that the Ulster
chiefs were tied down in Ulster to defend their own territories.

Although O'Neill managed to repulse another land offensive by Mountjoy
at the Battle of Moyry Pass near Newry in 1600, his position was
becoming desperate.

In 1601, the long promised Spanish finally arrived in the form of 3,500
soldiers at Kinsale, Cork, virtually the southern tip of Ireland.
Mountjoy immediately besieged them with 7,000 men. O'Neill, O'Donnell,
and their allies marched their armies south to sandwich Mountjoy, whose
men were starving and wracked by disease, between them and the
Spaniards. During the march south, O'Neill devastated the lands of those
who would not support him.

The English force might have been destroyed by hunger and sickness but
the issue was decided in their favour at the Battle of Kinsale. On the
5/6 January 1602, O'Donnell, against the wishes and advice of O'Neill,
took the decision to attack the English. Forming up for a surprise
attack, the Irish chiefs were themselves surprised by a cavalry charge,
resulting in a rout of the Irish forces. The Spanish in Kinsale
surrendered after their allies' defeat.

The Irish forces retreated north to Ulster to regroup and consolidate
their position. The Ulstermen lost many more men in the retreat through
freezing and flooded country than they had at the actual battle of
Kinsale. The last rebel stronghold in the south was taken at the siege
of Dunboy by George Carew.

Hugh Roe O'Donnell left for Spain pleading in vain for another Spanish
landing. He died in 1602 of a fever—it is often incorrectly alleged that
he was poisoned by a double agent. His brother Rory assumed leadership
of the O'Donnell clan. Both he and Hugh O'Neill were reduced to
guerrilla tactics, fighting in small bands, as Mountjoy, Dowcra,
Chichester, and Niall Garbh O'Donnell swept the countryside. The English
scorched earth tactics were especially harsh on the civilian population,
who died in great numbers both from direct targeting and from famine.

### End of the War

In 1602 O'Neill destroyed his capital at Dungannon due to the approach
of Mountjoy's forces, and withdrew to hide in the woods. In a symbolic
gesture Mountjoy smashed the O'Neills' inauguration stone at
Tullaghogue. Famine soon hit Ulster as a result of the English scorched
earth strategy. O'Neill's uirithe or sub-lords (O'Hagan, O'Quinn,
MacCann) began to surrender and Rory O'Donnell, Hugh Roe's brother and
successor, surrendered on terms at the end of 1602. However, with a
secure base in the large and dense forests of Tir Eoghain, O'Neill held
out until 30 March 1603, when he surrendered on good terms to Mountjoy,
signing the Treaty of Mellifont. Elizabeth I had died on 24 March.

Although the war had effectively ended with the signing of the Treaty of
Mellifont, its final battles were fought during the English invasion of
West Breifne in April 1603, which remained the sole holdout Irish
kingdom following O'Neill's capitulation. The kingdom was ruled by Brian
Óg O'Rourke, one of the alliance's chief lieutenants and leader of the
Irish forces during the Battle of Curlew Pass. He failed to secure any
concessions from the treaty as his half-brother Tadhg O'Rourke had
fought with the English during the war and was granted lordship of West
Breifne in return. Following a twelve-day siege, a force of 3,000 men
led by Tadhg, Henry Folliott, and Rory O'Donnell eventually brought the
area, and thus all of Ireland, under English control on 25 April 1603.

## Aftermath

The leaders of the rebellion received good terms from the new King of
England, James I, in the hope of ensuring a final end of the draining
war that had brought England close to bankruptcy. O'Neill, O'Donnell,
and the other surviving Ulster chiefs were granted full pardons and the
return of their estates.  The stipulations were that they abandon their
Irish titles, their private armies, and their control over their
dependents, and that they swear loyalty only to the Crown of England.
In 1604, Mountjoy declared an amnesty for rebels all over the country.
The reason for this apparent mildness was that the English could not
afford to continue the war any longer. Elizabethan England did not have
a standing army, nor could it force its Parliament to pass enough
taxation to pay for long wars. Moreover, it was already involved in a
war in the Spanish Netherlands. As it was, the war in Ireland (which
cost over £2 million) came very close to bankrupting the English
exchequer by its close in 1603.

Irish sources claimed that as many as 60,000 people had died in the
Ulster famine of 1602–3 alone. An Irish death toll of over 100,000 is
possible. At least 30,000 English soldiers died in Ireland in the Nine
Years' War, mainly from disease. So the total death toll for the war was
certainly at least 100,000 people, and probably more.

Although O'Neill and his allies received good terms at the end of the
war, they were never trusted by the English authorities and the distrust
was mutual. O'Neill, O'Donnell, and the other Gaelic lords from Ulster
allied to them left Ireland in 1607 in what is known as the "Flight of
the Earls" after news they planned another rebellion reached the
authorities. They intended to organise an expedition from a Catholic
power in Europe, preferably Spain, to restart the war but were unable to
find any military backers.

Spain had signed the Treaty of London in August 1604 with the new Stuart
dynasty and did not wish to reopen hostilities. Further, a Spanish fleet
had just been destroyed by a Dutch fleet in the Battle of Gibraltar in
April 1607. In 1608 Sir Cahir O'Doherty, who had previously fought on
the Crown's side against Tyrone, launched O'Doherty's Rebellion when he
attacked and burnt Derry. O'Doherty was defeated and killed at the
Battle of Kilmacrennan and the rebellion quickly collapsed.

In 1608 the absent earls' lands were confiscated for trying to start
another war, and were soon colonised in the Plantation of Ulster. The
Nine Years' War was therefore an important step in the English and
Scottish colonisation of Ulster.

## List of battles

1593 – Battle of Belleek

1594 – Siege of Enniskillen

1594 – Battle of the Ford of the Biscuits

1595 – Battle of Clontibret

1596 – Third Sack of Athenry

1596 – Siege of Galway, Sack of Bohermore

1597 – Battle of Casan-na-gCuradh

1597 – Battle of Carrickfergus

1598 – Battle of the Yellow Ford

1599 – Siege of Cahir Castle

1599 – Battle of Deputy's Pass

1599 – Battle of Curlew Pass

1600 – Battle of Moyry Pass

1600 – Battle of Lifford

1601 – Battle of Castlehaven

1601 – Siege of Donegal

1601 – Battle of Kinsale

1602 – Siege of Dunboy

1602 – Burning of Dungannon

## See also

Grace O'Malley

List of Irish uprisings

Tudor conquest of Ireland

Nine Years' War

Anglo-Spanish War (1585–1604)

Tudor period, perspective from English history

## References