# Clew Bay

Clew Bay (; Irish: Cuan Mó) is a large ocean bay on the Atlantic coast
of County Mayo, Ireland. It is roughly rectangular and has more than a
hundred small islands on its landward side; Ireland's best example of
sunken drumlins. The larger Clare Island guards the entrance of the bay.

The bay is overlooked by Croagh Patrick to the south and the Nephin Beg
Mountains to the north. From the southwest part of the bay eastwards are
the settlements Louisburgh, Lecanvey, Murrisk, and Westport; north of
Westport is Newport, and westwards from there lies Mulranny, gateway to
Achill.

## History

The bay was historically known in Irish as Cuan Mod ("harbour of Mod")
or Modlind ("pool of Mod"), and was associated with the Fir Bolg. This
later became Cuan Modha. Some writers claim that this name derives from
Modh, one of the Tuatha Dé Danann. Another possibility is the Old Irish
mod, moth, which meant "penis" or "man".

Another old name is Cuan Umhaill ("harbour of Umhaill"). It was rendered
in English as "Bay of the Owly" and "Bay of the Owles." Other English
names were the Bay of Borace, Horrus, and Baragh, all references to
Burrishoole (Buiríos Umhaill). The name 'Clew Bay', of uncertain origin,
first appears in a 1714 map; it may be derived from cliath, "hurdle".

Clew Bay was the heart of the Gaelic territory of Umhaill, ruled by the
Uí Máille (O'Malleys). Umhaill's last and most famous ruler was Grace
O'Malley (Gráinne Ní Mháille), nicknamed "the pirate queen". The
O'Malleys had a fleet of ships and several castles around Clew Bay,
including Carrickkildavnet Castle, Carrickahowley Castle and Granuaile's
Castle.

During the Irish Civil War in July 1922, 400 Free State troops were
landed at Clew Bay to take Westport and Castlebar from Anti-Treaty
forces.

In 2024, the discovery of a submerged late Bronze Age fort from the
depths of Clew Bay was announced by a team from Connemara and Mayo
County Council.

## Inishgort Lighthouse

Inishgort Lighthouse stands on the island of Inishgort, 5 km (3.1 mi)
from Murrisk.

## Fish farming in Clew Bay

In recent years there has been controversy over fish-farming in the bay.
"The Organic Salmon Company" (now owned by Mowi) is based in Clare
Island.

## Gallery

## Islands of Clew Bay

The bay is also home to Dorinish, a private island purchased by John
Lennon in 1967. Glenans Ireland, a non-profit sailing school, had a
branch on Collanmore Island where sailing was taught.

Legend has it that Clew Bay has 365 islands in it—"an island for every
day of the year". The large number of drumlins at the east end of the
bay gave rise to this myth, but in fact there are not so many.

### Drumlin islands, sandbars, and rocks

This chart shows the relative positions of the islands, sandbars, and
rocks in the eastern half of Clew Bay. There are 141 named islands and
islets within the bay.

## See also

Clew Bay Heritage Centre

Wild Atlantic Way

## References

## External links