# Croagh Patrick

Croagh Patrick (Irish: Cruach Phádraig, meaning '(Saint) Patrick's
stack'), nicknamed 'the Reek', is a mountain with a height of 764 m
(2,507 ft) and an important site of pilgrimage in County Mayo, Ireland.
The mountain has a pyramid-shaped peak and overlooks Clew Bay, rising
above the village of Murrisk, several kilometres from Westport. It has
long been seen as a holy mountain. It was the focus of a prehistoric
ritual landscape, and later became associated with Saint Patrick, who is
said to have spent forty days fasting on the summit. There has been a
church on the summit since the 5th century; the current church dates to
the early 20th century. Croagh Patrick is climbed by thousands of
pilgrims every year on Reek Sunday, the last Sunday in July, a custom
which goes back to at least the Middle Ages.

Croagh Patrick is the fourth-highest mountain in the province of
Connacht on the P600 listing after Mweelrea, Nephin and Barrclashcame.
It is part of a longer east–west ridge; the lower westernmost peak is
named Ben Goram.

## Name

'Croagh Patrick' comes from the Irish Cruach Phádraig meaning "(Saint)
Patrick's stack". It is known locally as "the Reek", a Hiberno-English
word for a "rick" or "stack". Previously it was known as Cruachán Aigle
or Cruach Aigle, being mentioned by that name in medieval sources such
as Cath Maige Tuired, Buile Shuibhne, The Metrical Dindshenchas, and the
Annals of Ulster entry for the year 1113. Cruachán is simply a
diminutive of cruach meaning "stack" or "peak". Aigle was an old name
for the area. The Dindsenchas (lore of places) says that Aigle was a
prince of Connacht who was slain by his uncle Cromderg in revenge for
his slaying of a woman under Cromderg's care. It is also suggested that
Aigle is an alternative form of aicil, "eagle".

The Marquess of Sligo, whose seat was nearby Westport House, bears the
titles Baron Mount Eagle and Earl of Altamont ("high mount"), both
deriving from Croagh Patrick.

## Historical significance

Perhaps because of its prominence, its pyramidal quartzite peak, and the
legends associated with it, Croagh Patrick has long been seen as a holy
mountain.

Archaeologist Christiaan Corlett writes that the large number of
prehistoric monuments surrounding and oriented towards Croagh Patrick
"suggests that the mountain has been a local spiritual inspiration since
at least the Neolithic, and during the Bronze Age became the focus of an
extensive ritual landscape".

A short distance east of the mountain lies the Boheh Stone, an outcrop
covered with ancient rock art. There are more than 260 carvings, making
it one of the most detailed pieces of ancient rock art in Ireland, and
one of only two in the province of Connacht. In 1987 it was rediscovered
that, from the Boheh stone, the setting sun appears to roll down the
slope of Croagh Patrick in late April and late August. It is believed
the stone was chosen because of this natural phenomenon. A stone row at
Killadangan is aligned with a niche in the mountain where the sun sets
on the winter solstice.

Archaeological surveying found remains of an enclosure encircling the
mountaintop and dozens of circular huts abutting it, which showed
evidence of Bronze Age date.

Tírechán, a native of Connacht, wrote in the 7th century that Saint
Patrick spent forty days on the mountain, like Moses on Mount Sinai. The
9th century Bethu Phátraic says that Patrick was harassed by a flock of
black demonic birds while on the peak, and he banished them into the
hollow of Lugnademon ("hollow of the demons") by ringing his bell.
Patrick ended his fast when God gave him the right to judge all the
Irish at the Last Judgement, and agreed to spare the land from the final
desolation. A later legend tells how Patrick was tormented by a demonic
female serpent named Corra or Caorthannach. Patrick is said to have
banished the serpent into Lough Na Corra below the mountain, or into a
hollow from which the lake burst forth.

## Pilgrimage

Archaeologists found that there had been a stone chapel or oratory on
the summit since the 5th century. There is reference to a "Teampall
Phádraig" (Patrick's Temple) from AD 824, when the Archbishops of Armagh
and Tuam disagreed as to who had jurisdiction on the site. A small
modern chapel was built on the summit and dedicated on 20 July 1905.

On the last Sunday in July, thousands of pilgrims climb Croagh Patrick
in honour of Saint Patrick, and masses are held at the summit chapel.
Some pilgrims climb the mountain barefoot, as an act of penance.
Traditionally, pilgrims would perform 'rounding rituals', in which they
pray while walking sunwise around features on the mountain. Among these
are a group of three ancient cairns known as Reilig Mhuire (Mary's
graveyard), which are likely Bronze Age burial cairns.

Folklorist Máire MacNeill conjectured that the pilgrimage pre-dates
Christianity and was originally a ritual associated with the festival of
Lughnasadh.

Today, most pilgrims climb Croagh Patrick from the direction of Murrisk
Abbey to the north. Originally, most pilgrims climbed the mountain from
the east, following the Togher Patrick (Tochár Phádraig) pilgrim path
from Ballintubber Abbey. This route is dotted with prehistoric
monuments, including the Boheh stone. Until 1970, it was traditional for
pilgrims to climb the mountain after sunset. It is possible that this
came from a pre-historic tradition of climbing the mountain after
viewing the 'rolling sun' phenomenon. The Tochár Phádraig may have
originally been the main route from Cruachan (seat of the Kings of
Connacht) to Cruachan Aigle, the original name of Croagh Patrick. The
Tochar Phadraig was revived and reopened as a cross-country pilgrimage
tourist trail by Pilgrim Paths of Ireland; the 30-kilometre route takes
about ten hours.

Local people and organisations point out that the large number of
climbers – as many as 40,000 per year – have damaged the mountain by
causing erosion which makes the climb more dangerous.

Local stakeholders have made efforts to combat the erosion caused by
foot traffic through the creation of a stone path up the mountain,
composed of stone from Croagh Patrick and assembled in a dry stone
manner.

## Gold discovery

A seam of gold was discovered in the core of the mountain in the 1980s.
Due to local resistance by the Mayo Environmental Group, headed by Paddy
Hopkins, Mayo County Council decided not to allow mining on Croagh
Patrick. The name of the Owenwee River (Abhainn Bhuí, yellow river) on
the south of the mountain may indicate an ancient awareness of gold
deposits in the area and gold panning in the river.

## Gallery

## See also

Lists of mountains in Ireland

List of mountains of the British Isles by height

List of P600 mountains in the British Isles

List of Marilyns in the British Isles

List of Hewitt mountains in England, Wales and Ireland

## Bibliography

Harry Hughes (2010). Croagh Patrick. A Place of Pilgrimage. A Place of
Beauty. O'Brien Press. ISBN 9781847171986.

Leo Morahan (2001). Croagh Patrick, Co. Mayo: archaeology, landscape and
people. Westport: Croagh Patrick Archaeological Committee. ISBN
0-9536086-3-8.

## References

## External links