# Kingscourt

Kingscourt, historically known as Dunaree (Irish: Dún an Rí, meaning
'fort of the king'), is a town in County Cavan, Ireland. It is located
near the Cavan–Meath border. The town was founded near the site of the
old village of Cabra, by Mervyn Pratt, towards the end of the 18th
century, and was completed by his brother, the Reverend Joseph Pratt. As
of the 2022 census, the population was 2,955.

## History

Cabra Castle, an early 19th-century 'Gothick-style' castle, is located
very near the town, being on the R179 road (known locally as the
Carrickmacross Road).  The castle was originally called Cormey Castle
and was built on the site of an earlier Cormey Castle which had been
destroyed during the Cromwellian War.  The castle has, in recent years,
been restored and expanded and is now a four-star hotel which is popular
for weddings.

The first significant evangelical action by The Irish Society for
Promoting the Education of the Native Irish through the Medium of Their
Own Language was in Kingscourt, in 1822 by Rev. Robert Winning,
supported by the local landlord Baron Farnham.

## Architecture

The local Catholic church, which is perched high above the town,
contains stained glass windows by the renowned Irish artist Evie Hone,
who also provided designs for Eton College Chapel. The local Church of
Ireland, St. Ernan's, Lisasturrin, Enniskeen, Kingscourt Parish, a
gothic revival church built c. 1780, has the stained glass Four
Evangelists' window (1864), originally in St. Jude's, Dublin, from the
William Wailes studio Newcastle-upon-Tyne.

## Economy

Building supplies company Kingspan is headquartered in the town. The
company was founded in 1965 and initially known as Kingscourt
Construction Group. Kingspan is now a constituent company on the Dublin
stock market's ISEQ 20 index.

## Environment

Dún na Rí Forest Park is located a couple of kilometers from Kingscourt.
Situated in a valley, and formerly part of the Pratt family's Cabra
Estate (which was centered on nearby Cabra Castle), Dún na Rí is home to
stoat, hare, mink, rabbit and otter, as well as red and grey squirrel
along the banks of the River Cabra. The park itself borders the Shercock
and Carrickmacross roads. The original Cabra House (also sometimes known
as Cabra Castle) was located within the modern forest park. The Pratt
dynasty moved into the current Cabra Castle (which is just across the
Carrickmacross Road from the forest park's main entrance) in 1813.

## Transport

### Railway

Kingscourt has a railway line which has been disused following strike
action by Iarnród Éireann train drivers in 2001. The line ceased to have
passenger services in 1947, and was then a freight-only service. The
line, which runs from Kingscourt to Navan and then on to Drogheda, was
used to carry gypsum ore daily from Gypsum Industries, but the company
withdrew this service when Iarnród Éireann could not guarantee
deliveries of Gypsum ore, and was consequently transferred to road
transport in 2001.

### Road

Kingscourt is situated on the R162 regional road where it connects with
the R164,  R165 and R179. The town is approximately 30 minutes drive
from the M1 motorway, via Ardee, County Louth, providing easy access to
Dublin Airport (95 km), Dublin city and its environs (90 km), Drogheda
(50 km), Dundalk (35 km) and Belfast (130 km).

### Bus

There are daily bus connections to Nobber, Navan and Dublin with both
Sillan Tours Limited and Bus Éireann.

On Tuesdays and Thursdays Bus Éireann route 166 provides a link to Cavan
via Bailieborough and Stradone, County Cavan. Royal Breffni Tours
operate a twice-daily service from Kingscourt to Dundalk IT.

## Sport

The Racquetball Association of Ireland is based in Kingscourt and the
14th IRF Racquetball World Championships took place in the town in 2008.
Held every two years, previous championships were held in the Dominican
Republic (2006), South Korea (2004) and Puerto Rico (2002). The
Kingscourt Handball and Racquetball court complex is the largest in
Ireland with three 40x20s and one 60x30 court. Kingscourt Handball Club
is home to a number of All-Ireland champions, and the club have won the
Senior All-Ireland Club title twice; once in 2001 and again in 2003.

In Gaelic football, the Kingscourt Stars are the fourth most successful
club in the county having won the Cavan Senior Football Championship
eleven times, most recently in 2015.

## Education

Schools include Coláiste Dún an Rí, a co-educational secondary school
opened in August 2016.

## Notable people

Shane Connaughton (born 1941), Irish writer and actor

Eugene Murtagh (born 1942), billionaire businessman, founder and
chairman of Kingspan Group

Victor Sherlock, Gaelic football player for Meath and Cavan

## See also

List of towns and villages in Ireland

## References