# Longford

Longford (Irish: An Longfort) is the county town of County Longford in
Ireland. It had a population of 10,952 at the 2022 census. It is the
biggest town in the county and about one third of the county's
population lives there. Longford lies at the meeting of Ireland's N4 and
N5 National Primary Route roads, which means that traffic travelling
between Dublin and County Mayo, or north County Roscommon passes around
the town. Longford railway station, on the Dublin-Sligo line, is used
heavily by commuters.

## History

The town is built at a fording point on the banks of the River Camlin
(from Irish Camlinn, meaning 'crooked pool'), which is a tributary of
the River Shannon. According to several sources, the name Longford is an
Anglicization of the Irish Longphort, referring to a fortress or
fortified house.

The area came under the sway of the local clan which controlled the
south and middle of the County of Longford (historically called Anghaile
or Annaly) and hence, the town was known as Longfort Uí Fhearghail
(fort/stronghold of O'Farrell).

A Dominican priory was founded there in 1400. St. John's Church of
Ireland (formerly known as Templemichael Parish Church) was built on the
site of the priory in 1710.

## Places of interest

Located to the south of Longford, in Keenagh, is the visitor centre of
the Corlea Trackway. It houses a preserved 18-metre stretch of Iron Age
bog road, which was built in c. 148 BC. There are also a number of
portal dolmens located around Longford.

The town serves as the cathedral town of the Roman Catholic Diocese of
Ardagh and Clonmacnoise. St Mel's Cathedral, dedicated to Saint Mel, the
founder of the diocese of Ardagh, was built between 1840 and 1856. It
was designed by architect John Benjamin Keane, who also designed St
Francis Xavier's Church on Gardiner Street in Dublin. St Mel's Cathedral
features several stained glass windows by Harry Clarke studios. These
include one of Clarke's earliest works, The consecration of St. Mel as
Bishop of Longford, which was exhibited at the RDS Annual Art Industries
Exhibition in 1910, where it received second prize. The cathedral was
extensively damaged in a fire on Christmas Day 2009. It remained closed
for five years after the fire, while it was the centre of one of the
largest restoration projects undertaken in Europe. It reopened for
services at midnight mass on Christmas Eve 2014 and has since become a
tourist attraction. Two of the intricate stained-glass windows in the
transepts of the cathedral, depicting St Anne and the Resurrection, have
been restored.

Longford town has a 212-seat theatre called Backstage Theatre just
outside of the town, and a four-screen multiplex cinema, with
restaurants. The Irish Prison Service HQ, which is in the Lisnamuck area
of the town, has a sculpture by artist Remco de Fouw, which is one of
the largest pieces of sculpture in Ireland.

In a 2003 Guardian article about Patrick McCabe, Longford's "features of
distinction" are described as including "a hulking cathedral, a rash of
fast-food joints, a grubby cinema and a shopping mall".

## Economy

Longford's main industries are food production, sawmills, steelworking,
generator retailing, cable making and the production of medical
diagnostics. It is the major services centre for the county as well as
the location of the Department of Social Welfare and the Irish Prison
Service. The town is also a local commercial centre, with a number of
retail outlets including multiples such as Tesco, and Argos, German
discount retailers, Aldi and Lidl and Irish retail outlets such as
Dunnes Stores and Penneys. A retail park, the N4 Axis Centre, opened in
Longford in October 2005.

Longford town has a decentralized government department which employs
approximately 300 people, and a further 130 are employed at the Irish
Prison Service's headquarters in the town. Connolly Barracks once
employed approximately 180 soldiers, many of whom were involved in UN
peace-keeping duties, until the barracks closed in January 2009.

While construction was formerly a major local employer, following the
post-2008 Irish economic downturn, there were job losses in the
construction industry and an increase in unemployment in the region.

## Education

Longford town has a number of primary schools (for ages 4–12) and three
secondary schools (for ages 12–19): two single-sex schools, St. Mel's
College (a Catholic boys' school), and Scoil Mhuire (a Catholic girls'
school run by the Sisters of Mercy), as well as a mixed school,
(Templemichael College, formerly known as Longford Vocational School).
Primary schools in Longford include a Gaelscoil and St. Joseph's. There
is also an adult education centre in Longford.

St. Mel's College is the oldest of these schools, being founded in the
1860s by the Roman Catholic Bishop of Ardagh and Clonmacnois as a
diocesan seminary to train students for the priesthood. While the school
only briefly functioned as a seminary, it served for many years as a
boarding school, while also admitting day students. The boarding school
was discontinued after 2000 and the school is now only a day school,
with the largest student enrolment in County Longford.

## Transport

### Road

Longford is at the point of divergence of the N5 road to
Castlebar/Westport/Ireland West Airport Knock and the N4 road which
continues onwards to Sligo.

The N5 originally started in the town centre, causing occasional traffic
congestion. The town's bypass opened on 3 August 2012.

The N4 Sligo road has a bypass around the town, which consists of single
carriageway with hard shoulders and four roundabouts. It was opened on 2
June 1995.

### Rail

Longford railway station (opened 8 November 1855) is on the Dublin-Sligo
line of the Irish railway network. About 91 kilometres (57 mi) from
Sligo and 122 km (76 mi) from Dublin, it is served by Sligo-Dublin
intercity services. Despite its distance from Dublin, there is a
regular, well-utilised commuter service to Dublin with journeys to
Dublin Connolly generally taking about an hour and three-quarters.

### Canals

The Royal Canal reopened in October 2010 after years of being derelict
and overgrown. Navigation is now possible from Spencer Dock, in Dublin,
to the Shannon, in Clondra.

### Bus

There are a number of bus services to Dublin and other towns both
outside and inside the county provided by both the state (Bus Éireann)
and private bus companies (Kane's, Donnelly's and Farrelly's.) Third
level colleges are also served by the private companies during the
academic year.

Donnelly's Pioneer Bus Service, a local bus company based in Granard,
operate a route from Longford to Granard via Ballinalee. There are three
journeys each way daily (no Sunday service).

Whartons Travel, which is also a local bus service, operate a route from
Longford railway station and Longford to Cavan via Drumlish, Arvagh and
Crossdoney. As of 2014, this service is funded by the National Transport
Authority.

### Air

Longford's main air transport centre is located south-east of the town,
at Abbeyshrule. Abbeyshrule Aerodrome receives a regular influx of small
general aviation aircraft, including the Cessna 182 and 150. The airport
also has two flight training centres; one for general aviation fixed
wing aircraft training (Aeroclub 2000) and one for microlight aircraft
flight training (Ultraflight).

## Arts and culture

The Backstage Theatre and Centre for the Arts is a facility for arts and
culture projects in the town and surrounding areas. It is funded by
Longford County Council with support from the Arts Council. Backstage is
a member of two arts touring networks: Nasc a nationwide network of
seven venues and Nomad a north midlands based network.

## Sport

The town has a number of sports clubs and facilities, including the
Gaelic Athletic Association, rugby and tennis clubs, a League of Ireland
soccer club (Longford Town FC), two indoor swimming pools, a gym and an
18-hole golf course. A swimming pool was opened in Longford in 2007.

### Gaelic football and hurling

The sport with most support in County Longford is Gaelic football. The
headquarters of the Longford Gaelic Athletic Association is located in
Pearse Park in Longford Town, with a ground capacity of around 11,000.
The Longford Gaelic football team won a Leinster title at Senior level
in 1968 and a National League title in 1966. The minor (under-18)
Longford county team won the Leinster title in 2002 and 2010. The major
boys' secondary school in Longford town, St. Mel's College, also has a
tradition in secondary schools' football (known as Colleges A), winning
29 Leinster and 4 All-Ireland titles (in the Hogan Cup). The main local
GAA club is Longford Slashers, based in Longford town, who have won more
Longford Senior Football Championship titles (16) than any other team in
the county, including a win in 2013.

### Soccer

Longford town's main association football (soccer) club, Longford Town
FC, was founded in 1924 and was elected to the League of Ireland in
1984. The club's ground is at Strokestown Road. Longford Town FC has
twice won the FAI Cup, in 2003 and 2004.

### Other sports

The local rugby union club, Longford RFC, was formed in the 1960s and
participates in the Leinster League.

Longford Sports & Leisure Centre, located in an area known locally as
The Mall, contains a swimming pool, gym, and indoor and outdoor football
and basketball facilities.

## People

Willie Browne (1936–2004), Republic of Ireland international footballer

Francis "Frank" Butler (1847–1926), rifleshot who toured the US
(1876–1884) and husband-manager of American sharpshooter Annie Oakley

Padraic Colum (1881–1972), Irish poet, novelist and playwright

Ray Flynn (b.1957), Irish mile record holder

Gareth Ghee, inter-county hurler

Michael Gomez (b.1977), champion professional boxer was born in an Irish
Traveller family in Longford.

Patrick McCabe (b.1955) novelist, has lived in Longford.

Ruairí Ó Brádaigh (1932–2013), founder of Republican Sinn Féin

## Climate

Climate in this area has mild differences between highs and lows, and
there is adequate rainfall year-round.  The Köppen Climate
Classification subtype for this climate is "Cfb" (Marine West Coast
Climate/Oceanic climate).

## See also

Carn Clonhugh

List of towns and villages in Ireland

## References

## External links