# Grace O'Malley

Gráinne O'Malley (Irish: Gráinne Ní Mháille, pronounced [ˈgˠɾˠaːn̠ʲə
n̠ʲiː ˈwaːl̠ʲə]; c. 1530 – c. 1603), also known as Grace O'Malley, was
the head of the Ó Máille dynasty in the west of Ireland, and the
daughter of Eóghan Dubhdara Ó Máille.

Upon her father's death, she took over active leadership of the lordship
by land and sea, despite having a brother, Dónal an Phíopa Ó Máille.
Marriage to Dónal an Chogaidh (Donal "of the war") Ó Flaithbheartaigh
brought her greater wealth and influence, reportedly owning as much as
1,000 head of cattle and horses. In 1593, when her sons Tibbot Bourke
and Murchadh Ó Flaithbheartaigh (Murrough O'Flaherty) and her half-
brother Dónal an Phíopa ("Donal of the Pipes") were taken captive by the
English governor of Connacht, Sir Richard Bingham, O'Malley sailed to
England to petition for their release. She formally presented her
request to Queen Elizabeth I at her court in Greenwich Palace.

O'Malley is not mentioned in the Irish annals, so documentary evidence
for her life comes mostly from English sources, especially the eighteen
"Articles of Interrogatory", questions put to her in writing on behalf
of Elizabeth I. She is mentioned in the English State Papers and in
other documents of the kind, as well.

In Irish folklore she is commonly known as Gráinne Mhaol (anglicised as
Granuaile) and is a well-known historical figure in sixteenth-century
Irish history. Her name was also rendered in contemporaneous English
documents in various ways, including Gráinne O'Maly, Graney O'Mally,
Granny ni Maille, Grany O'Mally, Grayn Ny Mayle, Grane ne Male, Grainy
O'Maly, and Granee O'Maillie, rarely as Grace O'Malley. In popular
culture, she is often referred to as "The Pirate Queen".

## Early life

O'Malley was born in Ireland around 1530, when Henry VIII was King of
England and held the title Lord of Ireland. Under the policies of the
English government at the time, the semi-autonomous Irish clans were
left mostly to their own devices. However, this was to change over the
course of O'Malley's life as the Tudor conquest of Ireland gathered
pace.

Eoghan Dubhdara Ó Máille, her father, and his family were based in Clew
Bay, County Mayo. He was Chief of the Name of Clan Ó Máille and Lord of
Umhaill, and claimed descent from Maille mac Conall. The Uí Mháille were
one of the seafaring clans of Connacht, and they had built a row of
castles facing the sea to protect their territory. They controlled most
of what is now the barony of Murrisk in south-west County Mayo and
recognised as their nominal overlords the Mac William Íochtar branch of
the Bourkes, who controlled much of what is now County Mayo. The Bourke
family (Irish: de Búrca) were originally Anglo-Norman (de Burgh) but by
O'Malley's lifetime had become completely Gaelicised. Her mother,
Margaret or Maeve, was also an O'Malley. Although she was the only child
of Dubhdara and his wife, O'Malley had a paternal half-brother called
Dónal na Píopa. Although under Brehon Law only male members of the
derbhfine could inherit the mantle of Chief of the Name through
tanistry, O'Malley "was considered to be the legal retainer of the
family land and seafaring activities".

With shore castles like Carrickkildavnet, the Clan Uí Mháille demanded
and received black rent from those who fished off their coasts, which
included fishermen from as far away as England. The head of the family
was known simply by his surname as Ó Máille (anglicised as The
O'Malley). The local oral tradition has it that O'Malley, as a young
girl, wished to go on a trading expedition to Spain with her father.
Upon being told she could not because her long hair would catch in the
ship's ropes, she cut off most of her hair to shame her father into
taking her. This earned her the nickname "Gráinne Mhaol" (Irish
pronunciation: [ˈɡɾˠaːn̠ʲə ˈwiːlˠ]; from maol, meaning 'bald' or 'having
cropped hair'), usually anglicised as Granuaile ( GRAWN-yoo-AYL). The
nickname may also come from Gráinne Umhaill ("Gráinne of Umhall", Umhall
being a historical district of west Connacht dominated by the Uí
Mháille).

As a child she most likely lived at her family's residence of Belclare
and Clare Island, but she may have been fostered by another family, as
fosterage was traditional among the Gaelic nobility of Ireland.

## Marriage to Ó Flaithbheartaigh

O'Malley was married in 1546 to Dónal an Chogaidh Ó Flaithbheartaigh,
tánaiste or heir to the Chief of the Name of Clan Ó Flaithbheartaigh,
which would have been a good political match for the daughter of the
Chief of Clan Ó Máille. As Ó Flaithbheartaigh tánaiste, Dónal an
Chogaidh had expectations of one day ruling as Lord of Iar Connacht,
which was roughly equivalent to modern Connemara.

She bore three children during her marriage to Dónal an Chogaidh:

Eóghan (Owen): The eldest child, known to be kind and forgiving. Sir
Richard Bingham tricked him; Owen was murdered as a result, and Bingham
and his troops took over his castle.

Méadhbh (Maeve): Said to be much like her mother, she married Richard
"the Devils Hook" Bourke, 22nd Mac William Íochtar (d.1601) with whom
she had several children. O'Malley and Bourke were supposedly very
close, more than once he saved her from death.

Murchadh (Murrough): Murrough was said to take after his father, for he
enjoyed warfare. He often beat his sister Maeve, and refused to listen
to his mother because of her sex. Many sources report that he betrayed
his family and joined forces with Sir Richard Bingham after the murder
of Owen. When O'Malley heard of this she swore she would never speak to
Murrough again for the rest of her life, though she would often insult
him. After Dónal an Chogaidh's death, O'Malley left Iar Connacht and
returned to Umhaill, taking with her many Clan Ó Flaithbheartaigh
warriors.

In 1564, Dónal's ambitions were dashed when his kinsman Murrough na
dTuadh Ó Flaithbheartaigh was appointed by Queen Elizabeth as Chief of
the Name instead of him. In 1565, Dónal was killed in an ambush while
hunting in the hills surrounding Lough Corrib. His assassination was,
undoubtedly, part of Dónal's wider struggle against Clan Joyce for
control of Hen's Castle upon the lough. When the Joyces moved to take
the Castle, thinking that Gráinne would not resist, she fought back
successfully and forced Clan Joyce to retreat. O'Malley then returned to
her own lands and established her principal residence upon Clare Island
(now called Granuaile's Castle). She allegedly took a shipwrecked sailor
as her lover. The affair lasted only briefly as he was killed by Clan
MacMahon of Ballyvoy. Seeking vengeance, O'Malley attacked Clan
MacMahon's stronghold of Doona Castle in Blacksod Bay and slew her
lover's murderers upon Caher Island. Her veangence against Clan MacMahon
earned Gráinne the nickname the 'Dark Lady of Doona'.

## Marriage to Bourke

By 1566, O'Malley had married a second time, this time to Risdeárd an
Iarainn ("Iron Richard") Bourke, 18th Mac William Íochtar (d.1583), his
nickname deriving from his ironworks at Burrishoole, the place of his
principal castle and residence. Tibbot Bourke, 1st Viscount Mayo was a
child of this marriage.

Still not satisfied with her revenge, O'Malley then sailed for Ballycroy
and attacked the garrison at Doona Castle, overpowering the defenders
and taking the castle for herself. Her attack against the MacMahons was
not the first time she interrupted someone at their prayers. Legend
tells of another lord who stole property from her and fled to a church
for sanctuary. She was determined to wait out the thief, maintaining
that he could starve or surrender. The thief dug a tunnel and escaped,
however, and the hermit who took care of the church broke his vow of
silence to scold her for attempting to harm someone who had sought
sanctuary. Her reply is not recorded.

More than twenty years after her death, an English Lord Deputy of
Ireland recalled her ability as a leader of fighting men, noting the
fame she still had among the Irish people.

## Autonomous status

In 1576, O'Malley engaged in the surrender and regrant process with the
Lord Deputy Sir Henry Sidney in respect of her lands. Because Rockfleet
was over a week's march from Dublin, and as she was so often at sea,
control by the Crown was very weak.

In 1593, in his letter to protest O'Malley's claims against him, Sir
Richard Bingham claimed that she was "nurse to all rebellions in the
province for this forty years". Bingham was Lord President of Connacht,
tasked with controlling local lords who had, until then, been mostly
autonomous.

O'Malley had every reason, and used every opportunity, to limit the
power of the Kingdom of Ireland over her part of the country. An
expedition from Galway led by Sheriff William Óge Martyn attacked her
castle at Clare Island in March 1579. However, they were put to flight
and barely escaped.

## Meeting with Elizabeth

In the late 16th century, English power steadily grew in Ireland and
O'Malley's power was steadily encroached upon. In June 1593, O'Malley
sent a petition to the Queen. She asked her "to grant her some
reasonable maintenance for the little tyme she hath to live". In return
she offered "a surrender at her hands" of the lands of her two sons and
those of her two surviving Bourke nephews. She asked for "free libertye
during her lyve to envade with sword and fire all your highness enemyes
wheresoever they are or shall be ... without any interruption of any
person or persons whatsoever". In May 1593, Hugh Maguire (Lord of
Fermanagh) rebelled and burned Ballymote, then under the control of Sir
George Bingham. One of Maguire's men was captured and implicated Grace's
son Tibbott-ne-Long in a wider Tyrone- inspired conspiracy against the
English. Tibbott was promptly captured by Sir Richard Bingham, sent to
Athlone prison and charged with treason. Grace's half-brother Dónal na
Píopa was also arrested by Sir Richard Bingham and charged with the
murder of some English soldiers. Grace sailed to England to petition
Queen Elizabeth I for their release. She was accompanied by Sir-
Murrough-ne-Doe O'Flaherty.

Sir Richard Bingham implied that Grace sailed her own ship to England as
he stated she brought over the son of Ulick Bourke of Erris and her
grandnephew, the son of Tibbott Reagh Bourke who "attended uppon Grany
O'Maille in her late beyinge at court". The Earl of Ormond, cousin and
favourite of the Queen, gave Grace an introduction to Lord Burghley,
chief advisor to the Queen. Burghley sent O'Malley a list of questions,
"eighteen articles of interrogatory" which were answered and returned.

At around the same time, Sir Richard Bingham wrote to Burghley: "There
be 2 notable traitors gon over Sir Morrow ne doe and Grainy O’Maly both
rebelle from their childhoode and continually in accion ... for
notwithstanding that they have many pardons there ys matter ynough of
late found out against them to hang them by justice".

Tradition but not the written sources states that O'Malley met with the
Queen at Greenwich Palace, wearing a fine gown; the two of them were
surrounded by guards and the members of Elizabeth's royal court.

Many of what Anne Chambers refers to as "fanciful tales" have
embellished the story of the meeting in Irish story-telling tradition.
For example, O'Malley is said to have refused to bow before Elizabeth
because she did not recognise her as the "Queen of Ireland". It was said
that she had a dagger concealed about her person, which guards found
upon searching her. Elizabeth's courtiers were said to be very upset and
worried, but O'Malley informed the Queen that she carried it for her own
safety. Elizabeth accepted this and seemed untroubled. It was said that
O'Malley had sneezed and was given a lace-edged handkerchief from a
noblewoman. She apparently blew her nose into it and then threw the
cloth into a nearby fireplace, much to the shock of the court. O'Malley
informed everyone that in Ireland, a used handkerchief was considered
dirty and was properly destroyed.

The Queen ordered her Privy Council to seek an explanation from Sir
Richard Bingham regarding his treatment of O'Malley and her family and
to investigate how her situation could best be relieved. Bingham
defended himself replying "in defence of my own innocency ... to shew me
instance of any one that ever I used violence against, havinge always (I
thancke the Lord) had that consideracion of christian duty as I never
sought any man's bloode otherwise then by course of her Maties. comon
lawes to take away." He made his thoughts clear that "how great soevr
any may make her wch knoweth her not I will nevr aske but a boat of xxx
tonnes to beate her ... and wth gods assistance dryve her and all her
fleet into the sea."

Towards the end of September 1593 the Queen wrote to Bingham ordering
the release of Tibbott-ne-Long and Dónal-ne-Píopa from prison. She also
ordered for provision to be made for Grace out of her sons' estates, the
amount to be deducted from their crown taxes. She requested Bingham to
allow them ownership of their lands and property and "protect them to
live in peace to enjoy their livelihoods". The Queen stated that
O'Malley had "departeth with great thankfulness and with many more
earnest promises that she will, as long as she lives, continue a dutiful
subject, yea and will employ all her power to offend and prosecute any
offender against Us".

The leading authority on the life of Grace O'Malley, Anne Chambers,
states that the conversation between the two women would have been in
English as all the indications are that O'Malley could speak it, and not
in Latin as often said.

## Last years

Sir Richard Bingham disagreed with the decision of the Queen and
initially did not obey her instructions, which O'Malley had personally
delivered to him on her return to Ireland.

O'Malley had to threaten him "that she would else repaire againe into
England" if he did not comply. Therefore, he reluctantly agreed, "to
enlarge Grany O'Mally, her son Tibbott and her brother Donal na Pippe,
... upon such slender surytes."

Grace O'Malley rebuilt her fleet with three large galleys and began to
return to her former life. Bingham struck, quartering a troop of his
soldiers on her ships to accompany her in her voyages and later forcing
her into service against some of her own kinsmen who he claimed were in
rebellion. Bingham quartered another detachment of his soldiers on Grace
O'Malley's property in Burishoole, leading to her impoverishment. Unable
to bear the strain, she, her sons cousins and followers "were forced to
withdrawe themselves into the Province of Mounster, where they do
remaine in great distresse". In April 1595 O'Malley sought the aid of
the Earl of Ormond at his Elizabethan manor at Carrick-on-Suir. Ormond
wrote to Burghley on her behalf. At some time between 17 April and 5 May
she returned to England to plead her case with Burghley. O'Malley was
rewarded when in August 1595, a commission was granted by the queen and
the Privy Council to investigate the lands in Mayo claimed by her two
sons, her grandson Dónal O'Flaherty, son of Owen, Dermot and Dónal
O'Malley of "Owel O'Maillie", and Miles MacEvilly, Tibbott-ne-Long's
foster-father, "with the intention of the Queen accepting their
surrenders of the premises and re-granting them by letters patent."

As the Nine Years' War escalated, O'Malley sought to retrench her
position with the crown. On 18 April 1595 she petitioned Lord Burghley,
complaining of the activities of troops and asking to hold her estate
for Elizabeth I. She added that "her sons, cousins, and followers will
serve with a hundred men at their own charges at sea upon the coast of
Ireland in Her Majesty's wars upon all occasions ... to continue dutiful
unto Her Majesty, as true and faithful subjects". Throughout the war she
encouraged and supported her son Tibbot Bourke to fight for the Crown
against Tyrone's confederation of Irish lords.

In September 1595, there was a conspiracy against Sir Richard Bingham;
he fled to England and was imprisoned. Sir Conyers Clifford was
appointed Governor of Connaught.

She most likely died at Rockfleet Castle around 1603, the same year as
Elizabeth's death, though the year and place of O'Malley's death are
disputed. Her family's usual burial place was in Clare Island Abbey.

## Biographical sources

In her 2006 biography of O'Malley, Irish historian and novelist Anne
Chambers described her as:

a fearless leader, by land and by sea, a political pragmatist and
politician, a ruthless plunderer, a mercenary, a rebel, a shrewd and
able negotiator, the protective matriarch of her family and tribe, a
genuine inheritor of the Mother Goddess and Warrior Queen attributes of
her remote ancestors. Above all else, she emerges as a woman who broke
the mould and thereby played a unique role in history.

Documentary evidence for O'Malley's life comes mostly from English
sources, as she is not mentioned in the Irish annals. The Ó Máille
family "book", a collection of eulogistic bardic poetry and other
material of the sort kept by aristocratic Gaelic households of the
period, has not survived. There are no contemporary images of her. An
important source of information is the eighteen "Articles of
Interrogatory", questions put to her in writing on behalf of Elizabeth
I. She is also mentioned in the English State Papers and in other
documents of the kind, an example being a letter sent by the Lord
Deputy, Sir Henry Sidney, to his son Phillip in 1577: "There came to mee
a most famous femynyne sea captain called Grace Imallye, and offred her
service unto me, wheresoever I woulde command her, with three gallyes
and two hundred fightinge men ..."

Local traditions concerning her were collected by Irish scholar John
O'Donovan in the 1830s and 1840s on behalf of the Ordnance Survey of
Ireland. In a letter of 1838, he describes her as being "most vividly
remembered by tradition and people were living in the last generation
who conversed with people who knew her personally".

Charles Cormick of Erris, now 74 years and six weeks old, saw and
conversed with Elizabeth O'Donnell of Newtown within the Mullet, who
died about 65 years ago who had seen and intimately known a Mr Walsh who
remembered O'Malley. Walsh died at the age of 107 and his father was the
same age as O'Malley.

A story is recorded of O'Malley chiding her son Tíoboíd in the course of
an attack on Kinturk Castle, when she thought he was shirking the
battle: "An ag iarraidh dul i bhfolach ar mo thóin atá tú, an áit a
dtáinig tú as?" ("Are you trying to hide in my arse, the place that you
came out of?"). She is also recorded as saying, with regard to her
followers, "go mb'fhearr léi lán loinge de chlann Chonraoi agus de
chlann Mhic an Fhailí ná lán loinge d'ór" (that she would rather have a
shipload of Conroys and MacAnallys than a shipload of gold).

## Westport House

Westport House in County Mayo, Ireland, was the seat of the Browne
dynasty, Marquesses of Sligo, direct descendants of Grace O'Malley. The
current house was built close to the site of Cahernamart (Cathair na
Mart – "fort of the beef market"), an Ó Máille fort. The original house
was built by Colonel John Browne, a Jacobite, who was at the Siege of
Limerick (1691), and his wife Maude Bourke. Maude Bourke was O'Malley's
great-great-granddaughter.

A statue of Grace O'Malley by the artist Michael Cooper – the brother-
in-law of the 11th Marquess of Sligo – is on display in Westport House,
and a bronze casting of the statue is situated on the grounds near the
house. Westport House also contains a comprehensive exhibition on the
life of O'Malley compiled by the author Anne Chambers, a leading
authority on Granuaile.

## Cultural impact

O'Malley's life has inspired many musicians, novelists, and playwrights
to create works based on her life and adventures and she has been used
as a personification of Ireland:

### Music

The Irish language poet and Easter Rising leader Patrick Pearse used
Gráinne O'Malley as a symbol of Irish republicanism in his lyrics to Óró
sé do bheatha abhaile.

In 1985, the Irish composer and singer Shaun Davey composed a suite of
music based on the life and times of O'Malley, Granuaile, published in
1986.

The Indulgers' 2000 album In Like Flynn includes a song entitled
"Granuaile", which is centred on the legend of O'Malley.

Dead Can Dance's 2012 album Anastasis features a song titled "Return of
the She-King", which was inspired by O'Malley.

The Irish musician Gavin Dunne (Miracle of Sound) released a song
entitled "Gráinne Mhaol, Queen of Pirates" on his 2015 album Metal Up.

The Canadian folk punk band The Dreadnoughts released a song entitled
"Grace O'Malley" on their 2009 Victory Square album.

The Swedish melodic death metal band Frantic Amber released a song
entitled "Graínne Mhaol" on their 2017 digital re-release of the
originally 2015 released album "Burning Insight".

The 2019 Album Talk like a Pirate by Rockin' Ron the friendly Pirate
"Ron Carter" features the song Pirate Grace O'Malley, based on the life
of Grace O'Malley

The 2022 song "Rule 23 – Birds of a Feather" by Fish in a Birdcage was
inspired by Grace O'Malley

### Theatre

The play Bald Grace by Marki Shalloe debuted at Chicago's Stockyards
Theatre in 2005, and was featured at Atlanta's Theatre Gael (America's
oldest Irish-American theatre) in 2006.

The Broadway musical The Pirate Queen depicting O'Malley's life debuted
at the Hilton Theater in 2007, with Stephanie J. Block portraying
O'Malley.

American actress Molly Lyons wrote and starred in a one-woman show
titled A Most Notorious Woman, detailing the life of O'Malley. It has
been produced internationally at theatres and festivals.

The play Gráinne, by J.Costello, K. Doyle, L. Errity, and A. L.
Mentxaka, of 2015, tells the story of Grace O'Malley in six snapshots.
It was premiered by Born to Burn productions in Dublin in November 2015,
with an all-woman cast playing three female roles and six male roles.
The text of the play was published in a limited edition by artisan
publishers Gur Cake Editions.

Irish actress, writer and director, Maggie Cronin's first play, a solo
show called A Most Notorious Woman: tales of Grace O'Malley – premiered
in 1989.

### Literature

James Joyce used the legend of Grace O'Malley ("her grace o'malice") and
the Earl of Howth in chapter 1 of his 1939 novel Finnegans Wake.

Morgan Llywelyn wrote a 1986 historical fiction titled Grania: She-King
of the Irish Seas.

Neal Stephenson and Nicole Galland make extensive reference to her via
written correspondence from one of the prominent characters throughout
their 2017 novel The Rise and Fall of D.O.D.O.

Siobhán Parkinson wrote a historical fiction book in 2019 in Irish
titled Gráinne – Gaiscíoch Gael (Gráinne – Hero of the Irish). Cois
Life. ISBN 978-1-907494-97-0.

John Crowley's 2022 novel Flint and Mirror includes the character
Gráinne O’Malley. ISBN 9781250817525.

### Statues

At Westport House – see above.

Outside "Old St Pat's" Church, Chicago

### Other

Grace O'Malley Park in Howth, Ireland commemorates her supposed attempt
in 1576 to visit the nearby Howth Castle. According to legend, Granuaile
temporarily abducted a family member after being denied entry.

Since 1948, the Commissioners of Irish Lights have sailed three vessels
named Granuaile. Their current sole light tender, commissioned in 2005,
is the most modern serving the coast of the island of Ireland.

In Tampa, Florida, Grace O'Malley is the inspiration for Ye Loyal Krewe
of Grace O'Malley, one of many crews that participate in the Gasparilla
Pirate Festival.

## See also

Gráinne (given name)

Irish galley

Castlekirk

Inishbofin, County Galway

## References

Sources

Song Carter Ron, Rockin' Ron the friendly pirate (2019) Pirate Grace
O'Malley, Album Talk like a pirate
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gvKtbiAjRpQ

## Further reading

Curzon, Catherine (30 January 2019). "Grace O'Malley, the Fearless 16th-
Century Irish Pirate Queen Who Stood Up to the English". Mental Floss.
Retrieved 26 March 2021.

O'Dowd, Mary (2008). "O'Malley, Gráinne (fl. 1577–1597)". Oxford
Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/20753. (Subscription or UK public library
membership required.)

Schwind, Mona L. (1978). "Nurse to all rebellions: Grace O'Malley and
sixteenth-century Connacht". Éire-Ireland. 13: 40–61.

## External links